®

2
STEP 3—GATHER FACTION COMPONENTS:  Each player takes 
the following components that match his faction. Each player places 
his faction sheet and all of his faction’s components in his play area. 
Players return all unused faction components to the game box.
•	 1 home system tile
•	 17 control tokens
•	 16 command tokens
•	 1 faction promissory note
•	 2 faction technology cards
•	 faction-specific	tokens
NOTE: Only the Naalu Collective, the Nekro Virus, and the Ghosts 
of	Creuss	have	faction-specific	tokens.
STEP 4—CHOOSE COLOR: Each player chooses one color and takes 
the following components corresponding to that color. Each player 
places his plastic units and command sheet in his play area.
•	 59 plastic units
•	 1 command sheet
•	 25 technology cards
•	 4 promissory notes
Each	player	combines	his	color-specific	and	faction	technology	
cards	into	one	technology	deck	and	his	color-specific	and	faction	
promissory note cards into one promissory note deck. Then, he 
places these decks in his play area.
STEP 5—DISTRIBUTE STARTING PLANET CARDS:  Each player 
takes the planet cards that correspond to the planets in his home 
system and places them faceup in his play area.
STEP 6—CREATE GAME BOARD:  Place the Mecatol Rex system 
tile in the center of the common play area—this is the center of the 
galaxy. The galaxy will consist of three rings around Mecatol Rex. 
Each player’s home systems will be in a set position in the third ring. 
Use the “Game Board Setup” diagram to estimate where players’ 
home systems will be placed based on each player’s position around 
the game area. Then, create the game board following these steps:
i. SEPARATE SYSTEMS: Separate the system tiles into two 
piles using the color on the back of each tile: one pile of 
blue-backed system tiles and one pile of red-backed system 
tiles. Green-backed system tiles are home systems and are 
not separated into piles in this way.
ii. DEAL SYSTEM TILES: Shuffle each pile of system tiles 
facedown. Then, deal facedown system tiles to each player 
according to player count:
•	 THREE-PLAYER: Six blue and two red tiles are dealt to 
each player.
•	 FOUR-PLAYER: Five blue and three red tiles are dealt to 
each player.
•	 FIVE-PLAYER: Four blue and two red tiles are dealt to each 
player.
•	 SIX-PLAYER: Three blue and two red tiles are dealt to each 
player.
USING THIS REFERENCE
This	document	is	the	definitive	source	for	all	Twilight Imperium: 
Fourth Edition rules. Before using this document, players should read 
and understand the rules presented in the Learn to Play booklet. As 
questions arise during gameplay, players should refer to this reference.
This reference includes two main sections: advanced concepts and 
the glossary. The advanced concepts section contains general rules 
that	players	should	learn	after	playing	their	first	game,	including	the	
complete setup rules.
The	glossary	provides	players	with	detailed	rules	and	clarifications	
listed in alphabetical order by topic. Players are encouraged to use 
the	index	on	page	30	to	find	specific	topics	within	the	glossary.
ADVANCED CONCEPTS
GOLDEN RULES
The golden rules are fundamental game concepts on which all other 
game rules are built.
•	 If information in this Rules Reference contradicts the Learn 
to Play booklet, the Rules Reference takes precedence.
•	 If a card ability contradicts information in the Rules 
Reference, the card takes precedence. If both the card and 
the rules can be followed at the same time, they should be.
•	 If a card or faction ability uses the word “cannot,” it is 
absolute and cannot be overridden by other abilities.
TIMING
If there are multiple abilities that players wish to resolve at the same 
time, each player takes a turn resolving an ability in initiative order. 
After each player has taken a turn, players again have a turn to resolve 
abilities in initiative order. This process repeats until all players have 
resolved all of the abilities they wish to resolve at that time.
If there are multiple abilities that players wish to resolve at the 
same time during the strategy phase, players take turns resolving 
abilities starting with the speaker and proceeding clockwise. 
For more information about timing and ability resolution, see 
“Abilities” on page 4.
COMPLETE SETUP
This section describes how to set up a game using all of the 
advanced rules. Note that some of these steps vary slightly from the 
“First-Game Setup” rules.
STEP 1—DETERMINE SPEAKER:  Randomly determine one player 
to gain the speaker token; he is the speaker.
STEP 2 —CHOOSE FACTIONS: Each player chooses one faction 
sheet; this is his faction for the game.

3
STEP 12—PREPARE OBJECTIVES: Prepare objectives as follows:
i. Each player draws two secret objectives and chooses one to 
keep. Shuffle the unchosen secret objectives back into the 
secret objective deck without revealing them.
ii. Place the victory point track near the game board. As a group, 
players decide whether to play with the 10- or 14-space side 
of the victory point track faceup. Each player places one of his 
control tokens on the “0” space of the track.
iii. The speaker deals five facedown stage I objectives and 
places them in a row below the victory point track. Then, he 
deals five facedown stage II objectives and places them in a 
row below the stage I objectives.
iv. The speaker reveals the first two stage I objectives.
NOTE: For	a	five-player	game,	one	additional	system	tile	will	be	
needed. Before placing system tiles, the speaker draws one random 
red-backed system tile and places it faceup in any space adjacent to 
Mecatol Rex.
iii. PLACE SYSTEM TILES:  First, players place their home 
systems in the approximate positions where they will connect 
to the galaxy. Then, starting with the speaker and proceeding 
clockwise, each player places one system tile faceup in 
the first ring around Mecatol Rex. After the last player has 
placed his first tile, he places a second tile. Then, the order 
of tile placement reverses and proceeds counterclockwise, 
until it reaches the speaker again, who places two tiles. Then, 
tile placement reverses again and proceeds clockwise. This 
process repeats until players have placed all of their tiles.
Each ring around Mecatol Rex must be fully built before 
any tile can be placed in the next ring. Anomaly system 
tiles cannot be placed next to one another unless there 
is no other option. Additionally, system tiles that contain 
the same type of wormhole cannot be placed next to one 
another unless there is no other option. After placing all of 
the dealt system tiles, players attach their home systems to 
the rest of the galaxy.
NOTE: During	a	five-player	game,	three	players	will	be	at	a	slight	
disadvantage based on their home systems’ starting positions on the 
game board. After creating the game board, those players receive 
trade goods based on their positions. Use the diagram to the right to 
determine how many trade goods each of those players receives.
STEP 7—PLACE CUSTODIANS TOKEN: Place the custodians 
token in the center of the game board on Mecatol Rex.
STEP 8—SHUFFLE COMMON DECKS: 	Shuffle	the	action	card,	
agenda, stage I objective, stage II objective, and secret objective 
decks separately and place them in the common play area.
STEP 9—CREATE SUPPLY:  Gather and create separate piles in 
the	common	play	area	for	trade	good	tokens,	fighter	tokens,	and	
infantry tokens.
STEP 10—GATHER STRATEGY CARDS: Place each of the eight 
strategy cards faceup in the common play area within reach of  
the speaker.
STEP 11—GATHER STARTING COMPONENTS:  Each player gains 
the starting technologies and starting units listed on the back of his 
faction sheet. Each player places the technology cards faceup near 
his faction sheet and the starting units in his home system. 
Each player places three command tokens in his tactic pool, three 
command	tokens	in	his	fleet	pool,	and	two	command	tokens	in	his	
strategy pool.
GAME BOARD SETUP
Six-Player  SetuP
Four -Player  SetuP t hree -Player  SetuP
Mecatol  r ex
h oMe  Sy SteM
r ing  1
r ing  2
r ing  3
Five -Player  SetuP
+2
+2
+4

4
1.11 TIMING
1.12 If the timing of an ability uses the word “after,” the ability’s 
effect occurs immediately after the described timing event.
•	 For example, if an ability is resolved “after a ship is 
destroyed,” the ability must be resolved as soon as the ship 
is destroyed and not later during that turn or round.
1.13 If the timing of an ability uses the word “when,” the ability’s 
effect occurs at the moment of the described timing event.
•	 Such	an	ability	typically	modifies	or	replaces	the	timing	
event in some way.
1.14 Effects that occur “when” an event happens take priority over 
effects that occur “after” an event happens.
1.15 If an ability uses the word “then,” a player must resolve the 
effect that occurs before the word “then” before resolving  
the effect that occurs after the word “then.”
1.16 Each ability can be resolved once for each occurrence of that 
ability’s timing event. For example, if an ability is resolved 
“At the start of combat,” it can be resolved at the start of each 
combat.
1.17 COMPONENT-SPECIFIC RULES
1.18 The opening paragraph of each ability found on an action card 
describes when a player can resolve that card’s ability.
1.19 The opening paragraph of most abilities found on promissory 
notes describes when a player can resolve that card’s ability.
•	 Some promissory notes have abilities that trigger as soon as 
a player receives the card.
1.20 Abilities on agenda cards correspond to an outcome. Players 
resolve these abilities during the agenda phase after players 
vote for a particular outcome.
1.21 Each faction has faction abilities presented on its faction sheet. 
Each	faction’s	flagship	has	one	or	more	unique	abilities.	Some	
abilities provide players with perpetual effects.
1.22 Some units have unit abilities. These abilities are named and 
presented above a unit’s attributes on a player’s faction sheet 
or on a unit upgrade card. Each unit ability has unique rules for 
when a player can resolve that ability. The following abilities 
are unit abilities:
•	 Anti-Fighter Barrage
•	 Bombardment 
•	 Planetary Shield
•	 Production
•	 Space Cannon
•	 Sustain Damage
1.23 If a unit’s ability uses the phrase “this system” or “this planet,” 
the ability is referring to the system or planet that contains that 
unit.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Cards, Promissory Notes, Strategy Card, 
Technology
GLOSSARY
This glossary provides players with detailed rules for Twilight 
Imperium: Fourth Edition, organized by topic. Players are 
encouraged	to	use	the	index	on	pagepage	30	to	find	specific	topics	
within the glossary.
1 ABILITIES
Cards and faction sheets each have abilities that players can resolve 
to trigger various game effects.
1.1 Each ability describes when and how a player can resolve it.
1.2 If a card has multiple abilities, each ability is presented as its 
own paragraph.
1.3 If an ability contains the word “Action,” a player must use a 
component action during the action phase to resolve that ability.
1.4 If an ability uses the word “cannot,” that effect is absolute.
1.5 When a player resolves an ability, he must resolve the ability 
in its entirety. Any parts of the ability preceded by the word 
“may” are optional, and the player resolving the ability may 
choose not to resolve those parts.
1.6 Abilities on components that remain in play are mandatory 
unless they use the word “may.”
1.7 If an ability has multiple effects separated by the word “and,” a 
player must resolve as many of the ability’s effects as possible. 
However, if he cannot resolve all of its effects, he is allowed to 
resolve as many as he can.
1.8 COSTS
1.9 Some abilities have a cost that is followed by an effect. The 
cost of an ability is separated from the effect by the word “to” 
or by a semicolon. A player cannot resolve the effect of such an 
ability if he cannot resolve that ability’s cost. 
1.10 Some examples of an ability’s cost include spending resources, 
spending trade goods, spending command tokens, exhausting 
cards,	and	activating	specific	systems.

5
2.10 If there are multiple action cards that players wish to resolve 
at the same time during the action phase, each player takes 
a turn resolving one action card in initiative order, beginning 
with the active player. This process repeats until each player 
has resolved all the action cards that he wishes to resolve 
during that window.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Component Action, Politics, Status 
Phase
3 ACTION PHASE
During the action phase, each player takes a turn in initiative order. 
During a player’s turn, he performs a single action. After each 
player has taken a turn, player turns begin again in initiative order. 
This process continues until all players have passed.
3.1 During a player’s turn, he may perform one of the following 
three types of actions: a strategic action, a tactical action, or a 
component action.
3.2 If a player cannot perform an action, he must pass.
3.3 After a player has passed, he cannot perform additional actions 
during that action phase.
•	 A player that has passed can still resolve the secondary 
ability of other players’ strategy cards.
•	 It is possible for a player to perform multiple, consecutive 
actions during an action phase if all other players have 
passed during that action phase.
3.4 A player cannot pass until he has performed a strategic action.
•	 During a three-player or four-player game, a player cannot 
pass until he has exhausted both of his strategy cards.
3.5 After all players have passed, play proceeds to the status phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Component Action, Game Round, Status Phase, 
Strategic Action, Tactical Action
4 ACTIVE PLAYER
The active player is the player taking a turn during the action phase.
4.1 During the	action	phase,	the	player	who	is	first	in	initiative	
order	is	the	first	active	player.
4.2 After the active player takes a turn, the next player in initiative 
order becomes the active player.
4.3 After the last player in initiative order takes a turn, the player 
who	is	first	in	initiative	order	becomes	the	active	player	again,	
and turns begin again in initiative order, ignoring any players 
who have already passed.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Initiative Order
2 ACTION CARDS
Action cards provide players with various abilities that they can 
resolve as described on the cards.
2.1 Each player draws one action card during each status phase.
2.2 Players can draw action cards by resolving the primary and 
secondary abilities of the “Politics” strategy card.
2.3 When a player draws an action card, he takes the top card from 
the action card deck and adds it to his hand of action cards.
2.4 Each player can have a maximum of seven action cards in his 
hand at any time. If a player ever has more than seven action 
cards, he must choose which seven cards he wishes to keep and 
discard the rest.
•	 A game effect can increase or decrease the number of cards 
a player can have in his hand.
2.5 A player’s action cards remain hidden from other players until 
they are played.
2.6 The first	paragraph	of	each	action	card	is	presented	in	bold 	
text and describes the timing of when that card’s ability can 
be resolved.
•	 If an action card contains the word “Action,” a player must 
use a component action during the action phase to resolve 
the ability. A player cannot resolve a component action if he 
cannot completely resolve its ability.
•	 Multiple action cards with the same name cannot be played 
during a single timing window to affect the same units or 
game mechanic.
2.7 To play an action card, a player reads and resolves the card’s 
ability text. Then, he discards the card, placing it in the action 
discard pile.
2.8 If an action card is canceled, that card has no effect and is 
discarded.
2.9 If there are multiple action cards that players wish to resolve at 
the same time during the strategy or agenda phases, players 
take turns resolving action cards starting with the speaker and 
proceeding clockwise. This process repeats until each player 
has resolved all the action cards that he wishes to resolve 
during that window.
The 1X had scarcely interfaced with 
The 1X had scarcely interfaced with 
The 1X had scarcely interfaced with 
The 1X had scarcely interfaced with 
the mainframe before it belonged 
the mainframe before it belonged 
to them completely.
to them completely.
INFILTRATE
INFILTRATE
INFILTRATE
When you gain control of a 
When you gain control of a 
When you gain control of a 
planet:
planet:
planet:
Replace each PDS and space 
Replace each PDS and space 
Replace each PDS and space 
dock that is on that planet 
dock that is on that planet 
dock that is on that planet 
with a matching unit from 
with a matching unit from 
with a matching unit from 
your reinforcements.
your reinforcements.


6
7.4 If a law is in a player’s play area as opposed to the common 
play area, that player owns that law.
7. 5 If a law is discarded from play, that law’s ability is no longer 
in effect. Place that card on the top of the agenda card discard 
pile.
7.6 If an “Against” outcome of a law received the most votes, 
players resolve the outcome and discard the agenda.
7.7 Directives provide one-time game effects. 
7. 8 When resolving a directive, players resolve the outcome that 
received the most votes and discard the agenda card.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Phase, Attach, Victory Points
8 AGENDA PHASE
During the agenda phase, players can cast votes on agendas that can 
change the rules of the game.
8.1 Players skip the agenda phase during the early portion of each 
game. After the custodians token is removed from Mecatol 
Rex, the agenda phase is added to each game round. To resolve 
the agenda phase, players perform the following steps:
8.2 STEP 1—FIRST AGENDA: 	Players	resolve	the	first	agenda	by	
following these steps in order:
i. REVEAL AGENDA: The speaker draws one agenda card 
from the top of the agenda deck and reads it aloud to 
all players, including all of its possible outcomes.
ii. VOTE: Each player, starting with the player to the left 
of the speaker and continuing clockwise, can cast votes 
for an outcome of the current agenda.
iii. RESOLVE OUTCOME: Players tally each vote that was 
cast and resolve the outcome that received the most 
votes.
8.3 STEP 2—SECOND AGENDA:  Players repeat the “First 
Agenda” step of this phase for a second agenda.
8.4 STEP 3—READY PLANETS:  Each player readies each of his 
exhausted planets. Then, a new game round begins starting 
with the strategy phase.
8.5 VOTING
When voting during the agenda phase, a player can cast votes for a 
specific	outcome	of	an	agenda.
8.6 To cast votes, a player exhausts any number of his planets. The 
player casts a number of votes for an outcome of his choice equal 
to	the	combined	influence	values	of	the	planets	he	exhausted.
•	 When a player exhausts a planet to cast votes, he must cast 
the full amount of votes provided by that planet.
5 ACTIVE SYSTEM
The active system is the system that is activated during a tactical action.
5.1 When a player performs a tactical action, he activates a system 
by placing a command token from his tactic pool on that 
system. That system is the active system.
5.2 A player cannot activate a system that already contains one of 
his command tokens.
5.3 A player can activate a system that contains command tokens 
that match other players’ factions.
5.4 A system remains the active system for the duration of the 
tactical action during which it was activated.
RELATED TOPICS: Movement, Tactical Action
6 ADJACENCY
Two system tiles are adjacent to each other if any of the tiles’ edges 
are touching each another.
6.1 A system that has a wormhole is treated as being adjacent to a 
system that has a matching wormhole.
6.2 A unit or planet is adjacent to all system tiles that are adjacent 
to the system tile that contains that unit or planet.
RELATED TOPICS: Movement, Neighbors, Wormholes
7 AGENDA CARD
Agenda cards represent galactic laws and policies. During each agenda 
phase,	players	cast	votes	for	specific	outcomes	on	two	agenda	cards.
7.1 There are two types of agenda cards: laws and directives.
7. 2 Laws can permanently change the rules of the game. 
7. 3 When resolving a law, if a “For” outcome received the most 
votes, or if the law requires an election, the law’s ability 
becomes a permanent part of the game. Players resolve the 
outcome and place the agenda card either in the common play 
area or in a player’s play area, as dictated by the card.
DIRECTIVE
Elect Non-Home Planet 
Other Than Mecatol Rex
Destroy each unit on the 
elected planet. Then, the 
player who controls that 
planet chooses 1 player with 
the fewest victory points; that 
player may place 1 infantry 
from his reinforcements 
on the elected planet.
COLONIAL 
COLONIAL 
REDISTRIBUTION
REDISTRIBUTION


7
9 ANOMALIES
An anomaly is a system tile that has unique rules.
9.1 An	anomaly	is	identified	by	a	red	border	located	on	the	tile’s	
corners.
9.2 There are	four	types	of	anomalies:	asteroid	fields,	nebulae,	
supernovas, and gravity rifts.
9.3 Each	type	of	anomaly	is	identified	by	its	art,	as	follows:
RELATED TOPICS: Asteroid Field, Gravity Rift, Movement, 
Nebula, Supernova, System Tiles
10 ANTI-FIGHTER BARRAGE (UNIT ABILITY)
A unit with the “Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability may be able to 
destroy	an	opponent’s	fighters	at	the	start	of	the	first	round	of	a	
space combat. During the “Anti-Fighter Barrage” step of space 
combat, players perform the following steps:
10.1 STEP 1— Each player rolls dice for each of his units in the 
combat that has the “Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability; this is called 
an	anti-fighter	barrage	roll.	A	hit	is	produced	for	each	die	roll	that	
is	equal	to	or	greater	than	the	unit’s	anti-fighter	barrage	value.
•	 If a unit has an “Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability, it is 
presented on its faction sheet and technology cards.
•	 The “Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability is displayed as “Anti-
Fighter Barrage X (Y).” The X is the minimum value 
needed for a die to produce a hit, and Y is the number of 
dice rolled.
•	 Game effects that reroll, modify, or otherwise affect combat 
rolls	do	not	affect	anti-fighter	barrage	rolls
10.2 STEP 2:— Each player must choose and destroy one of his 
fighters	in	the	active	system	for	each	hit	his	opponent’s	anti-
fighter	barrage	roll	produced.
•	 If	a	player	has	to	assign	more	hits	than	he	has	fighters	in	the	
active system, the excess hits have no effect.
RELATED TOPICS: Destroyed, Space Combat
41
43
42
44
Gravity Rift
NebulaAsteroid Field
Supernova
8.7 A player cannot cast votes for multiple outcomes of the same 
agenda. Each vote he casts must be for the same outcome.
8.8 Some agendas have “For” and “Against” outcomes. When a 
player casts votes on such an agenda, he must cast his votes 
either “For” or “Against.”
8.9 Some agendas instruct players to elect either a player or a planet. 
When a player casts votes for such an agenda, he must cast his 
vote for an eligible player or planet as described on the agenda.
8.10 When electing a player, a player can cast votes for himself. 
•	 When resolving these agendas, the “elected player” is the 
player who had the most votes cast for him.
8 .11 When electing a planet, a player must cast votes for a planet 
that is controlled by a player. 
•	 When resolving these agendas, the “elected planet” is the 
planet that had the most votes cast for it.
8.12 When casting votes, a player must declare aloud the outcome 
for which his votes are being cast.
8.13 Trade goods cannot be spent to cast votes.
8.14 A player may choose to abstain by not casting any votes.
8.15 Some game effects allow a player to cast additional votes for 
an outcome. These votes cannot be cast for a different outcome 
than other votes cast by that player.
8.16 If a player cannot vote on an agenda because of a game effect, 
he cannot cast votes for that agenda by exhausting planets or 
through any other game effect.
8.17 OUTCOMES
8.18 To resolve an outcome, the speaker follows the instructions on 
the agenda card.
8.19 If there is a tie for the outcome that received the most votes, the 
speaker decides which of the tied outcomes to resolve.
8.20 If an “Elect” or “For” outcome of a law was resolved, that card 
remains in play and permanently affects the game.
8.21 If a directive or an “against” outcome of a law was resolved, 
that card is placed in the agenda discard pile.
8.22 Some game effects instruct a player to predict an outcome. 
To predict an outcome, a player declares aloud the outcome 
he thinks will receive the most votes. He must make this 
prediction after the agenda is revealed but before any votes 
have been cast.
•	 A predicted outcome must be a possible outcome of the 
revealed agenda.
•	 After resolving the outcome of the agenda, resolve any 
abilities that were dependent upon predicting the outcome.
RELATED TOPICS:	Custodians	Token,	Game	Round,	Influence

8
•	 Game effects that reroll, modify, or otherwise affect combat 
rolls do not affect bombardment rolls.
•	 Multiple planets in a system may be bombarded, but a 
player must declare which planet a unit is bombarding 
before making a bombardment roll.
•	 The L1Z1X’s “Harrow” ability does not affect the L1Z1X 
player’s own ground forces.
•	 Planets that contain a unit with the “Planetary Shield” 
ability cannot be bombarded.
15.2 STEP 2— The player who controls the planet that is being 
bombarded chooses and destroys one of his ground forces on 
that planet for each hit result the bombardment roll produced.
•	 If a player has to assign more hits than he has ground 
forces, the excess hits have no effect.
RELATED TOPICS: Invasion, Planetary Shield
16 CAPACITY (ATTRIBUTE)
Capacity is an attribute of some units that is presented on those 
units’ faction sheets and technology cards.
16.1 A unit’s capacity value indicates the maximum combined 
number	of	fighters	and	ground	forces	that	it	can	transport.
16.2 The combined capacity values of a player’s ships in a system 
determine	the	number	of	fighters	and	ground	forces	he	can	have	
in that system’s space area.
16.3 If	a	player	has	more	fighters	and	ground	forces	in	the	space	area	
of a system than the total capacity of his ships in that system, 
he must destroy the excess units of his choice.
•	 Ground forces on planets do not count against capacity.
•	 A	player’s	fighters	and	ground	forces	can	exceed	capacity	
during combat. At the end of combat, he must destroy the 
excess units.
16.4 Fighters	and	ground	forces	are	not	assigned	to	specific	ships,	
except while they are being transported.
RELATED TOPICS: Movement, Capacity, Transport
17 COMBAT (ATTRIBUTE)
Combat is an attribute of some units that is presented on those units’ 
faction sheets and technology cards. 
17.1 During combat, if a unit’s combat roll produces a result equal 
to or greater than its combat value, it produces a hit.
17. 2 If a unit’s combat value contains two or more burst icons, 
instead of rolling a single die, the player rolls one die for each 
burst icon when making that unit’s combat rolls.
RELATED TOPICS: Ground Combat, Invasion, Space Combat
11 ASTEROID FIELD
An	asteroid	field	is	an	anomaly	that	affects	movement.
11.1 A ship	cannot	move	through	or	into	an	asteroid	field.
RELATED TOPICS: Anomalies
12 ATTACH
Some game effects instruct a player to attach a card to a planet card. 
A	card	that	is	attached	to	a	planet	card	modifies	that	planet	card	in	
some way.
12.1 To attach a card to a planet card, a player places the card with 
the attach effect partially underneath the planet card.
12.2 If a player gains or loses control of planet that contains a card 
with an attach effect, the attached card stays with that planet.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Card, Control, Planets
13 ATTACKER
During combat, the active player is the attacker.
RELATED TOPICS: Defender, Invasion, Space Combat
14 BLOCKADED
A player’s unit with “Production” is blockaded if it is in a system 
that contains another player’s ships but does not contain any of his 
own ships.
14.1 A player cannot use a blockaded unit to produce ships; he can 
still use a blockaded unit to produce ground forces.
RELATED TOPICS: Producing Units, Ships
15 BOMBARDMENT (UNIT ABILITY)
A unit with the “Bombardment” ability may be able to destroy 
another player’s ground forces during an invasion. During 
the “Bombardment” step of an invasion, players perform the 
following steps:
15.1 STEP 1— The active player chooses which planet each of his 
units that has a “Bombardment” ability will bombard. Then he 
rolls dice for each of those units; this is called a bombardment 
roll. A hit is produced for each die roll that is equal to or greater 
than the unit’s “Bombardment” value.
•	 If a unit has a “Bombardment” ability, it is presented on its 
faction sheet and technology cards.
•	 The “Bombardment” ability is displayed as “Bombardment 
X (Y).” The X is the minimum value needed for a die to 
produce a hit, and Y is the number of dice rolled. Not all 
“Bombardment” abilities have a (Y) value; a bombardment 
roll for such a unit consists of one die.

9
19.5 After a player performs a strategic action during the action 
phase, each other player can resolve the secondary ability of 
that strategy card by spending a command token from his own 
strategy pool.
•	 A player does not spend a command token to resolve the 
secondary ability of the “Leadership” strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Fleet Pool, Leadership, Reinforcements, 
Strategic Action, Tactical Action
20 COMMODITIES
Commodities represent goods that are plentiful for 
their own faction and are desired by other factions. 
A commodity has no inherent game effects, but 
converts into a trade good if given to or received 
from another player.
20.1 Commodities and trade goods are represented by opposite sides 
of the same token.
20.2 The commodity value on a player’s faction sheet indicates the 
maximum number of commodity tokens he can have.
20.3 When an effect instructs a player to replenish commodities, he 
takes the number of commodity tokens necessary so that the 
amount he has equals the commodity value on his faction sheet. 
Then, he places those tokens faceup in the commodity area of 
his faction sheet.
20.4 When a player replenishes commodities, he takes the 
commodity tokens from the supply.
20.5 Players can trade commodities following the rules for 
transactions. When a player receives a commodity from another 
player, the player who received that token converts it into a 
trade good by placing it in the trade good area of his command 
sheet with the trade good side faceup.
•	 That token is no longer a commodity token; it is a trade 
good token.
•	 A player can trade commodity tokens before resolving a 
game effect that allows him to replenish commodities.
20.6 Any game effect that instructs a player to give a commodity to 
another player causes that commodity to be converted into a 
trade good.
20.7 A player cannot spend commodities; he can only trade them 
during a transaction.
20.8 Commodity tokens come in values of one and three. A player 
can swap between these tokens as necessary.
RELATED TOPICS: Deals, Trade Goods, Transactions
18 COMMAND SHEET
Each player has a command sheet 
that contains a strategy pool, a 
tactic	pool,	a	fleet	pool,	a	trade	
good area, and a quick reference.
18.1 A player places command 
tokens in his pools; players 
can use these command 
tokens to perform strategic 
and tactical actions and to 
increase the number of ships they can have in each system.
18.2 A player places trade good tokens in his trade good area; these 
tokens	can	be	spent	as	resources,	influence,	or	to	resolve	certain	
game effects that require trade goods.
18.3 Players who are familiar with the game can hide the quick 
reference by placing that portion of the command sheet under 
their faction sheets.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Tokens, Fleet Pool, Strategic Action, 
Tactical Action, Trade Goods
19 COMMAND TOKENS
Command tokens are a currency that players use to perform actions 
and	expand	their	fleets.
19.1 A player begins the game with eight command tokens on his 
command	sheet:	three	in	his	tactic	pool,	three	in	his	fleet	pool,	
and two in his strategy pool.
•	 Command tokens in the strategy and tactic pool are placed 
with the faction symbol faceup.
•	 Command	tokens	in	the	fleet	pool	are	placed	with	the	ship	
silhouette faceup.
19.2 When a player gains a command token, he chooses which of 
the three pools on his command sheet to place it in.
19.3 A player is limited by the amount of command tokens in his 
reinforcements.
•	 If he would gain a command token but has none available in 
his reinforcements, he cannot gain that command token.
19.4 During the action phase, a player can perform a tactical action 
by spending a command token from his tactic pool; he places 
the command token in a system.
FLEET
TACTIC
TRADE GOODS
STRATEGY
TYPES OF ACTIONS
     ✦Strategic Action
     ✦ Tactical Action 
     ✦Component Action
THE TACTICAL ACTION 
      1) Activation 
      2) Movement 
 i) Move Ships 
 ii) Space Cannon Offense 
      3) Space Combat 
 i) Anti-Fighter Barrage 
 ii) Announce Retreats 
 iii) Make Combat Rolls 
 iv) Assign Hits 
 v) Retreat 
     4) Invasion 
       i) Bombardment 
      ii) Commit Ground Forces 
     iii) Space Cannon Defense 
 v) Ground Combat 
 vi) Establish Control 
      5) Production
STATUS PHASE
      1)  Score Objectives 
2)  Reveal Public Objective 
3) Draw Action Cards 
4) Remove Command Tokens 
5) Gain and Redistribute Tokens 
6) Ready Cards 
7) Repair Units 
8)  Return Strategy Cards
ANOMALIES
      Asteroid Field 
  • Ships Cannot Move Through or Into 
Nebula 
  • Ships Cannot Move Through 
  • Ships In Nebula Move Set to 1 
  • +1 Combat Die Results to  
 Defender Within Nebula 
Supernova 
  • Ships Cannot Move Through or Into 
Gravity Rift 
  • Each Ship Moving Through or Out  
    of Applies +1 Move and Rolls 1 die;  
    Unit is Destroyed on Result of 1–3.
QUICK REFERENCE
FLEET
TACTIC
TRADE GOODS
STRATEGY
TYPES OF ACTIONS
     ✦Strategic Action
     ✦ Tactical Action 
     ✦Component Action
THE TACTICAL ACTION 
      1) Activation 
      2) Movement 
 i) Move Ships 
 ii) Space Cannon Offense 
      3) Space Combat 
 i) Anti-Fighter Barrage 
 ii) Announce Retreats 
 iii) Make Combat Rolls 
 iv) Assign Hits 
 v) Retreat 
     4) Invasion 
       i) Bombardment 
      ii) Commit Ground Forces 
     iii) Space Cannon Defense 
 v) Ground Combat 
 vi) Establish Control 
      5) Production
STATUS PHASE
      1)  Score Objectives 
2)  Reveal Public Objective 
3) Draw Action Cards 
4) Remove Command Tokens 
5) Gain and Redistribute Tokens 
6) Ready Cards 
7) Repair Units 
8)  Return Strategy Cards
ANOMALIES
      Asteroid Field 
  • Ships Cannot Move Through or Into 
Nebula 
  • Ships Cannot Move Through 
  • Ships In Nebula Move Set to 1 
  • +1 Combat Die Results to  
 Defender Within Nebula 
Supernova 
  • Ships Cannot Move Through or Into 
Gravity Rift 
  • Each Ship Moving Through or Out  
    of Applies +1 Move and Rolls 1 die;  
    Unit is Destroyed on Result of 1–3.
QUICK REFERENCE


10
23 CONSTRUCTION (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Construction” strategy card allows players to construct 
structures on planets they control. This card’s initiative value is “4.”
23.1 During the action phase, if the active player has the 
“Construction” strategy card, he can perform a strategic action 
to resolve that card’s primary ability.
23.2 To resolve the primary ability on the “Construction” strategy 
card, the active player may place either one PDS or one space 
dock on a planet he controls. Then, he may place an  
additional PDS on a planet he controls.
•	 The structures can be placed on the same planet or different 
planets.
•	 The structures can be placed in any systems, regardless of 
whether the player has a command token in the system or not.
23.3 After the active player resolves the primary ability of the 
“Construction” strategy card, each other player, beginning 
with the player to the left of the active player and proceeding 
clockwise, may place one command token from his strategy 
pool in any system. If he already has a command token in 
that system, the spent token is returned to his reinforcements 
instead. Then, he places either one PDS or one space dock on a 
planet he controls in that system.
23.4 When a player places either a PDS or space dock using the 
“Construction” strategy card, he takes that PDS or space dock 
from his reinforcements.
•	 If a player does not have enough units in his reinforcements, 
he can remove units from any systems that do not 
contain one of his command tokens and place them in his 
reinforcements. Then, he must place this unit on the game 
board as instructed by the effect placing the unit.
RELATED TOPICS: Initiative Order, Strategic Action, Strategy 
Card, Structures
24 CONTROL
Each player begins the game with control of the planets in his 
home system. During the game, players can gain control of 
additional planets.
24.1 When a player gains control of a planet, he takes the planet 
card that corresponds to that planet and places it in his play 
area; that card is exhausted.
•	 If	a	player	is	the	first	player	to	control	a	planet,	he	takes	the	
planet card from the planet card deck.
•	 If another player controls the planet, he takes that planet’s 
card from the other player’s play area.
21 COMPONENT ACTION
A component action is a type of action that a player can perform 
during his turn of an action phase.
21.1 Component actions can be found on various game components, 
including action cards, technology cards, and faction sheets. 
Each component action is indicated by an “Action” header.
21.2 To perform a component action, a player reads the action’s text 
and follows the instructions as described.
21.3 A component action cannot be performed if its ability cannot be 
completely resolved.
21.4 If a component action is canceled, it does not use that player’s 
action.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Action Cards, Action Phase, 
Technology
22 COMPONENT LIMITATIONS
If a component type is depleted during the game, players obey the 
following rules:
22.1 DICE: Dice are limitless. If a player needs to roll more dice than 
the game provides, he should roll as many as possible, record 
the results, and then reroll dice as necessary.
22.2 TOKENS: Tokens are limited to those included in the game, 
except for the following: 
•	 Control Tokens
•	 Fighter Tokens
•	 Trade Good Tokens
•	 Infantry Tokens
22.3 If any of the above tokens are depleted, players can use a 
suitable substitute, such as a coin or bead.
22.4 UNITS: Units are limited to those included in the game, except 
for	fighters	and	ground	forces.
•	 When producing units, if a player does not have enough 
units in his reinforcements, he can remove units from any 
systems that do not contain one of his command tokens and 
place them in his reinforcements. Then, he can produce any 
units that he removed. He cannot remove units in this way 
unless he is immediately producing a unit of that type.
•	 When	producing	a	fighter	or	infantry	unit,	a	player	can	
use	a	fighter	or	infantry	token,	as	appropriate,	from	the	
supply instead of a plastic piece. These tokens must be 
accompanied by at least one plastic piece of the same type; 
players	can	swap	infantry	and	fighter	tokens	for	plastic	
pieces at any time.
22.5 CARDS: When	a	deck	is	depleted,	players	shuffle	the	deck’s	
discard pile and place it facedown to create a new deck.
RELATED TOPICS: Producing Units, Units

11
26.3 When a player removes the custodians token from Mecatol 
Rex, he takes the token from the game board and places it in 
his play area. Then, he gains one victory point.
26.4 After a player removes the custodians token from Mecatol 
Rex, the agenda phase is added to all subsequent game rounds, 
including the game round during which the custodians token 
was removed from Mecatol Rex.
RELATED TOPICS:	Agenda	Phase,	Influence,	Victory	Points
27 DEALS
A deal is an agreement between two players that may or may not 
include a transaction that involves physical components.
27.1 Players can make deals with each other at any time, even 
if they are not neighbors. However, deals that include a 
transaction must follow the rules for transactions, including that 
the players be neighbors.
27. 2 Deals are binding or non-binding according to the conditions of 
the deal.
27. 3 If the terms of a deal can be resolved immediately, it is a 
binding deal. When a deal is binding, a player must adhere to 
the terms of the agreement and whatever transactions, if any, 
were agreed upon.
27.4 If the terms of a deal cannot be resolved immediately, it is a non-
binding deal. When a deal is non-binding, a player does not have 
to adhere to any part of the agreement if he chooses not to.
RELATED TOPICS: Promissory Notes, Trade Goods, Trade Goods
28 DEFENDER
During either a space or ground combat, the player who is not the 
active player is the defender.
RELATED TOPICS: Attacker, Invasion, Nebula, Space Combat
29 DESTROYED
Various game effects can cause a unit to be destroyed. When a 
player’s unit is destroyed, it is removed from the game board and 
returned to his reinforcements.
29.1 When a player assigns hits that were produced against his units, 
he chooses a number of his units to be destroyed equal to the 
number of hits produced against his units.
29.2 Forcing a player to remove a unit from the board by reducing 
the	number	of	command	tokens	in	his	fleet	pool	does	not	count	
as destroying a unit.
RELATED TOPICS: Anti-Fighter Barrage, Bombardment, Space 
Cannon, Space Combat, Sustain Damage
24.2 A player cannot gain control of a planet that he already controls.
24.3 While a player controls a planet, that planet’s card remains in 
his play area until he loses control of that planet.
24.4 A player can control a planet that he does not have any units 
on; he places a control token on that planet to mark that he 
controls it.
24.5 A player loses control of a planet if another player has units on 
that planet and he no longer has units on it. 
•	 The player that placed units on the planet gains control of 
that planet.
24.6 A player can also lose control of a planet through some game 
effects.
24.7 If a player loses control of a planet that contains his control 
token, he removes his control token from the planet.
RELATED TOPICS: Attach, Exhausted, Invasion, Planets
25 COST (ATTRIBUTE)
Cost is an attribute of some units that is presented on those units’ 
faction sheets and technology cards. A unit’s cost determines the 
number of resources a player must spend to produce that unit.
25.1 To produce a unit, a player must spend a number of resources 
equal to or greater than the cost of the unit he is producing.
25.2 If the cost is accompanied by two icons—typically for 
fighters	and	ground	forces—a	player	produces	two	of	that 	
unit for that cost.
25.3 If a unit does not have a cost, it cannot be produced.
•	 Structures do not have costs and are usually placed by 
resolving the “Construction” strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Producing Units, Resources
26 CUSTODIANS TOKEN
The custodians token begins each game on 
Mecatol Rex. The token represents the caretakers 
that safeguard the seat of the empire until the time 
when one of the great races claims the throne.
26.1 Units can move into the system that contains 
Mecatol Rex following normal rules; however, players cannot 
commit ground forces to land on Mecatol Rex until the 
custodians token is removed from the planet.
26.2 Before the “Commit Ground Forces” step of an invasion, the 
active player can remove the custodians token from Mecatol 
Rex	by	spending	six	influence.	Then,	he	must	commit	at	least	
one ground force to land on the planet.
•	 If he cannot commit ground forces to land on Mecatol Rex, 
he cannot remove the custodians token.


12
32 EXHAUSTED
Some cards can be exhausted. A player cannot resolve abilities or 
spend	the	resources	or	influence	of	an	exhausted	card.
32.1 To exhaust	a	card,	a	player	flips	the	card	facedown.
32.2 During the “Ready Cards” step of the status phase, each player 
readies	all	of	his	exhausted	cards	by	flipping	them	faceup.
32.3 A player exhausts his planet cards to spend either the resources 
or	influence	on	that	card.
32.4 Abilities, including some found on technology cards, may 
instruct a player to exhaust a card to resolve those abilities. If a 
card is already exhausted, it cannot be exhausted again.
32.5 After a player performs a strategic action, he exhausts the 
strategy card that corresponds to that action.
RELATED TOPICS: Influence,	Planets,	Resources,	Status	Phase
33 FIGHTER TOKENS
A	fighter	token	functions	as	a	plastic	fighter	unit	
for all game purposes.
33.1 When	producing	a	fighter	unit,	a	player	can	
use	a	fighter	token	from	the	supply	instead	of	
a plastic piece.
33.2 Players	can	replace	their	plastic	fighters	with	tokens	at	any	time.
33.3 If	a	player	ever	has	a	fighter	token	in	a	system	that	does	not	
contain	one	of	his	plastic	fighters,	he	must	replace	it	with	one	
of	his	plastic	fighters	from	his	reinforcements.
•	 If he cannot replace the token, the unit is destroyed.
33.4 Fighter tokens come in values of one and three. A player can 
swap between these tokens as necessary.
RELATED TOPICS: Infantry Tokens, Producing Units
34 FLEET POOL
The	fleet	pool	is	an	area	of	a	player’s	command	sheet.
34.1 The number	of	command	tokens	in	a	player’s	fleet	pool	
indicates	the	maximum	number	of	non-fighter	ships	that	a	
player can have in a system.
34.2 Players place	command	tokens	in	their	fleet	pools	with	the	ship	
silhouette faceup.
34.3 If at any time the number of a player’s ships in a system 
exceeds	the	number	of	tokens	in	his	fleet	pool,	he	chooses	and	
destroys excess ships in that system.
34.4 Players do not spend command tokens from this pool.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Sheet, Command Tokens, Ships, 
System Tiles
30 DIPLOMACY (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Diplomacy” strategy card can be used to preemptively prevent 
other	players	from	activating	a	specific	system.	It	can	also	be	used	
to ready planets. This card’s initiative value is “2.”
30.1 During the action phase, if the active player has the 
“Diplomacy” strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to 
resolve that card’s primary ability.
30.2 To resolve the primary ability on the “Diplomacy” strategy card, 
the active player chooses a system that contains a planet he 
controls other than the Mecatol Rex system and readies any of his 
exhausted planets in that system. Then, each other player places 
one command token from his reinforcements on that system.
•	 If a player has no command tokens in his reinforcements, he 
places one of his choice from his command sheet.
•	 If a player already has a command token in the chosen 
system, he does not place a command token there.
30.3 After the active player resolves the primary ability of the 
“Diplomacy” strategy card, each other player, beginning 
with the player to the left of the active player and proceeding 
clockwise, may spend one command token from his strategy 
pool to ready up to two exhausted planets he controls.
RELATED TOPICS: Active System, Command Tokens, Initiative 
Order, Planets, Readied, Strategic Action, Strategy Card
31 ELIMINATION
A player who is eliminated is no longer part of the game.
31.1 A player is eliminated when he meets all of the following three 
conditions:
•	 The player has no ground forces on the game board.
•	 The player has no unit that has “Production.”
•	 The player does not control any planets.
31.2 When a player becomes eliminated, all of the units, command 
tokens, control tokens, promissory notes, technologies, 
command sheets, as well as the faction sheet that matches his 
faction or color are returned to the game box, including those in 
his reinforcements.
31.3 When a player becomes eliminated, all agenda cards he owns 
are discarded.
31.4 When a player becomes eliminated, each promissory note he 
has that matches another player’s faction or color is returned to 
that player.
•	 Promissory notes that match the eliminated player are 
returned to the game box, even if another player has them.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Card, Control, Ground Forces, 
Production, Promissory Notes

13
38.2 STEP 2—ASSIGN HITS:  Each player must choose one of his 
ground forces on the planet to be destroyed for each hit result 
his opponent produced.
•	 When a unit is destroyed, the player who controls that 
unit removes it from the board and places it in his 
reinforcements.
38.3 After assigning hits, if both players still have ground forces on 
the planet, players resolve a new combat round starting with the 
“Roll Dice” step.
38.4 Combat ends when only one player (or neither player) has 
ground forces on the planet.
•	 After a combat ends, the player with one or more ground 
forces remaining on the planet is the winner of the combat; 
the other player is the loser of the combat. 
•	 If neither player has a ground force remaining, then there is 
no winner; the combat ends in a draw.
RELATED TOPICS: Invasion, Planets
39 GROUND FORCES
A ground force is a type of unit. All infantry units in the game are 
ground forces. Some races have unique infantry units.
39.1 Ground forces are always either on planets or being transported 
by ships that have a capacity value.
39.2 Ground forces being transported by a ship are placed in a 
system’s space area along with the ship that is transporting 
them.
39.3 There is no limit to the number of ground forces a player can 
have on a planet.
RELATED TOPICS: Capacity, Control, Infantry Tokens, Transport, 
Units
35 GAME BOARD
The game board consists of all system tiles in play.
35.1 The game board consists of all system tiles that were placed 
during setup, even if the edges of those tiles do not touch any 
other system tiles, such as the Ghosts of Creuss’ home system.
RELATED TOPICS: System Tiles
36 GAME ROUND
A game round consists of the following four phases:
1. Strategy Phase
2. Action Phase
3. Status Phase
4. Agenda Phase
36.1 Players skip the agenda phase during the early portion of each 
game. After the custodians token is removed from Mecatol 
Rex, the agenda phase is added to each game round.
36.2 Player turns occur during the action phase.
36.3 Abilities that last until the end of a player’s turn do not persist 
for the duration of a game round or into the other phases of 
that game round. Those effects end at the end of that player’s 
turn, before the next player’s turn begins.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Agenda Phase, Custodians 
Token, Status Phase, Strategy Phase
37 GRAVITY RIFT
A gravity rift is an anomaly that affects movement.
37.1 A ship that will move out of or through a gravity rift at any 
time during its movement, applies +1 to its move value.
•	 This can allow a ship to reach the active system from farther 
away than it normally could.
37. 2 Each ship that moves out of or through a gravity rift rolls one 
die after moving; on a result of 1–3, that ship is destroyed.
RELATED TOPICS: Anomalies, Movement
38 GROUND COMBAT
During the “Invasion” step of a tactical action, if the active player 
commits ground forces to land on a planet that contains another 
player’s ground forces, those players resolve a ground combat 
on that planet. To resolve a ground combat, players perform the 
following steps:
38.1 STEP 1—ROLL DICE:  Each player rolls one die for each ground 
force he has on the planet; this is a combat roll. If a unit’s 
combat roll produces a result that is equal to or greater than that 
unit’s combat value, that roll produces a hit.
•	 If a unit’s combat value contains two or more burst icons, 
the player rolls one die for each burst icon instead.

14
42 INFLUENCE
Influence	represents	a	planet’s	political	power.	Players	spend	
influence	to	gain	command	tokens	using	the	“Leadership”	strategy	
card,	and	the	influence	values	of	planets	are	used	to	cast	votes	
during the agenda phase.
42.1 A planet’s	influence	is	the	rightmost	value	(surrounded	by	a	
blue border) found on the planet’s system tile and planet card.
42.2 A player	can	spend	a	planet’s	influence	by	exhausting	that	
planet’s card.
42.3 A player	can	spend	a	trade	good	as	if	it	were	one	influence.
•	 Players cannot spend trade goods to cast votes during the 
agenda phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Phase, Exhausted, Leadership, Agenda 
Phase
43 INITIATIVE ORDER
Initiative order is the order in which players resolve steps of the 
action and status phases.
43.1 Initiative order is determined by the initiative numbers on 
strategy cards.
43.2 Initiative order begins with the player who has the lowest-
numbered strategy card and proceeds to the player who has the 
strategy card that is next in numerical order.
•	 Only strategy cards that were chosen during the strategy 
phase are used when determining initiative order; strategy 
cards not chosen during the strategy phase are ignored.
43.3 When playing with three or four players, a player’s initiative is 
determined only by his lowest-numbered strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Strategy Card, Status Phase
40 IMPERIAL (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Imperial” strategy card allows players to score victory points 
and draw secret objectives. This card’s initiative value is “8.”
40.1 During the action phase, if the active player has the “Imperial” 
strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to resolve that 
card’s primary ability.
40.2 To resolve the primary ability on the “Imperial” strategy card, 
the active player can score one public objective of his choice if 
he meets that objective’s requirements as described on its card. 
Then, if the active player controls Mecatol Rex, he gains one 
victory point; if he does not control Mecatol Rex, he can draw 
one secret objective card.
40.3 After the active player resolves the primary ability of the 
“Imperial” strategy card, each other player, beginning with the 
player to the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise, 
may spend one command token from his strategy pool to draw 
one secret objective card.
40.4 If a player has more than three secret objective cards after 
drawing a secret objective, he must choose one of his unscored 
secret objectives and return it to the secret objective deck. 
This number includes the secret objective cards in the player’s 
hand and	the	cards	he	has	already	scored.	Then,	he	shuffles	the	
secret objective deck.
RELATED TOPICS: Initiative Order, Objective Cards, Strategic 
Action, Strategy Card
41 INFANTRY TOKENS
An infantry token functions as a plastic infantry 
unit for all game purposes.
41.1 When producing an infantry unit, a player can 
use an infantry token from the supply instead 
of a plastic piece.
41.2 Players can replace their plastic infantry with tokens at any 
time.
41.3 If a player ever has an infantry token on a planet that does 
not contain one of his plastic infantry or in the space area 
of a system that does not contain one of his plastic infantry, 
he must replace it with one of his plastic infantry from his 
reinforcements.
•	 If he cannot replace the token, the unit is destroyed.
41.4 Infantry tokens come in values of one and three. A player can 
swap between these tokens as necessary.
RELATED TOPICS: Fighter Tokens, Producing Units


15
45 LEADERSHIP (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Leadership” strategy card allows players to gain command 
tokens. This card’s initiative value is “1.”
45.1 During the action phase, if the active player has the 
“Leadership” strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to 
resolve that card’s primary ability.
45.2 To resolve the primary ability on the “Leadership” strategy 
card, the active player gains three command tokens. Then, he 
can	spend	any	amount	of	his	influence	to	gain	one	command	
token	for	every	three	influence	he	spends.
45.3 After the active player resolves the primary ability of the 
“Leadership” strategy card, each other player, beginning 
with the player to the left of the active player and proceeding 
clockwise,	may	spend	any	amount	of	influence	to	gain	one	
command	token	for	every	three	influence	he	spends.
45.4 When a player gains command tokens, he places each token on 
his command sheet in the pool of his choice.
RELATED TOPICS:	Command	Sheet,	Command	Tokens,	Influence,	
Initiative Order, Strategic Action, Strategy Card
46 MECATOL REX
Mecatol Rex is the planet placed in the center of the game board 
during setup.
46.1 During setup, the custodians token is placed on Mecatol Rex. This 
token prevents a player from committing ground forces to land 
on	the	planet	unless	he	spends	six	influence	to	remove	the	token.
RELATED TOPICS: Custodians Token
47 MODIFIERS
A	modifier	is	a	number	that	is	applied	by	an	ability	to	increase	or	
decrease the attribute values of a unit or the results of a die roll.
47.1 A modifier	is	always	preceded	by	the	word	“apply”	followed	by	
a numerical value.
47. 2 A	modifier	value	preceded	by	a	“+”	is	added	to	the	attribute	
or	result	being	modified;	a	modifier	value	preceded	by	a	“-”	is	
subtracted	from	the	attribute	or	result	being	modified.
RELATED TOPICS: Combat, Cost, Move
44 INVASION
Invasion is a step of the tactical action during which the active player 
can land ground forces on planets to gain control of those planets.
To resolve an invasion, players perform the following steps:
44.1 STEP 1—BOMBARDMENT:  The active player may use the 
“Bombardment” ability of any of his units in the active system.
44.2 STEP 2— COMMIT GROUND FORCES: If the active player 
has ground forces in the space area of the active system, he 
may commit any number of those ground forces to land on any 
of the planets in that system.
•	 To commit a ground force to a planet, the active player 
places that ground force unit on that planet.
•	 The planet may contain another player’s ground forces.
•	 If the active player does not wish to commit ground forces, 
he proceeds to the “Production” step of the tactical action.
44.3 STEP 3—SPACE CANNON DEFENSE:  If the active player 
commits any ground forces to a planet that contains units 
that have the “Space Cannon” ability, those “Space Cannon” 
abilities can be used against the committed ground forces.
•	 If the active player committed ground forces to more than 
one planet that contained units with a “Space Cannon” 
ability, the active player chooses the order in which those 
“Space Cannon” abilities are resolved.
44.4 STEP 4—GROUND COMBAT:  If the active player commits 
ground forces to land on a planet that contains another 
player’s ground forces, those players resolve a ground combat 
on that planet.
•	 If players must resolve a combat on more than one planet, 
the active player chooses the order in which those combats 
are resolved.
44.5 STEP 5— ESTABLISH CONTROL: The active player gains 
control of each planet he committed ground forces to that still 
contains at least one of his ground forces.
•	 When a player gains control of a planet, any structures on 
the planet that belong to other players are immediately 
destroyed.
•	 When a player gains control of a planet, he gains the planet 
card that matches that planet and exhausts that card.
•	 A player cannot gain control of a planet he already controls.
•	 If there was a combat, and all units belonging to both 
players were destroyed, the player who was the defender 
retains control of the planet and places one of his control 
markers on the planet.
RELATED TOPICS: Bombardment, Combat, Control, Ground 
Combat, Ground Forces, Opponent, PDS, Planets

16
50 NEBULA
A nebula is an anomaly that affects movement and combat.
50.1 A ship can only move into a nebula if it is the active system.
•	 A ship cannot move through a nebula. That is, a ship cannot 
move into and out of a nebula during the same movement.
50.2 A ship that begins the “Movement” step of a tactical action in a 
nebula treats its move value as “1” for the duration of that step.
•	 Other abilities and effects can increase this number.
50.3 If a space combat occurs in a nebula, the defender applies +1 to 
the combat rolls of his ships during that combat.
RELATED TOPICS: Anomalies
51 NEIGHBORS
Two players are neighbors if they both have a unit or control a 
planet in the same system. They are also neighbors if they both have 
a unit or control a planet in systems that are adjacent to each other.
51.1 Players can resolve transactions with their neighbors.
51.2 Players are neighbors if the adjacency of systems is granted by 
a wormhole.
51.3 Players are neighbors with the Ghosts of Creuss if the Ghosts 
of Creuss’ “Quantum Entanglement” faction ability is causing 
adjacency from the perspective of the Ghosts of Creuss player.
RELATED TOPICS: Neighbors, Promissory Notes, Transactions
52 OBJECTIVE CARDS
Players can score objectives to gain victory points.
52.1 There are two types of objective cards: public objectives and 
secret objectives.
•	 Each public objective has a “I” or “II” on the back of its 
card; all other objectives are secret objectives.
52.2 Each objective card indicates a number of victory points that a 
player gains by scoring that objective.
52.3 Each objective card indicates the phase during which a player 
can score that objective—either the status phase or action phase.
52.4 Each objective card describes the requirement a player must 
fulfill	to	score	that	objective.
52.5 If a	player	fulfills	the	requirement	described	on	an	objective	
card, he can score that objective following the timing indicated 
on the card, either during the action phase or the status phase.
•	 When a player scores an objective during the status phase, 
he	must	fulfill	the	requirement	on	the	card	during	the	“Score	
Objectives” step of the status phase to score that objective.
48 MOVE (ATTRIBUTE)
Move is an attribute of some units that is presented on those units’ 
faction sheets and technology cards.
48.1 A unit’s move value indicates the distance from its current 
system that it can move during the “Movement” step of a 
tactical action.
RELATED TOPICS: Movement, Tactical Action
49 MOVEMENT
A player can move his ships by resolving a tactical action during the 
action phase. Additionally, some abilities can move a unit outside of 
the tactical action.
49.2 TACTICAL ACTION MOVEMENT
49.3 Most ships have a move value printed on their faction sheets 
and technology cards. This value indicates the distance from its 
current system that a ship can move.
To resolve movement, players perform the following steps:
49.4 STEP 1—MOVE SHIPS: A player can move any number of his 
eligible ships into the active system, obeying the following rules:
•	 The ship must end its movement in the active system.
•	 The ship cannot move through a system that contains non-
fighter	ships	controlled	by	another	player.
•	 The ship cannot move if it started its movement in another 
system that contains one of its faction’s command tokens.
•	 The ship can move through systems that contain its own 
faction’s command tokens.
•	 The ship can move out of the active system and back into it 
if its move value is high enough.
•	 The ship must move along a path of adjacent systems, and 
the number of systems the ship enters cannot exceed its 
move value.
49.5 When a ship with a capacity value moves or is moved, it may 
transport	ground	forces	and	fighters.
49.6 The active player’s ships move simultaneously.
49.7 STEP 2—SPACE CANNON OFFENSE: After the “Move 
Ships” step, players can use the “Space Cannon” abilities of 
their units in the active system.
49.8 ABILITY MOVEMENT
49.9 If an ability moves a unit outside of the “Movement” step of a 
tactical	action,	players	follow	the	rules	specified	by	that	ability;	
neither	a	unit’s	move	value	nor	the	rules	specified	above	apply.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Active System, Capacity, Space 
Cannon, Tactical Action, Transport

17
52.17 SECRET OBJECTIVES
A secret objective is an objective that is 
controlled by one player and is hidden from 
all other players until it is scored.
52.18 When scoring a secret objective, a player 
reveals the objective by placing it faceup 
in his play area. Then, he places one of 
his control tokens on that objective’s 
card and advances his control token 
on the victory point track a number of 
spaces equal to the number of victory points he gained.
52.19 A player can only score his own secret objectives; he cannot 
score secret objectives revealed by other players.
52.20 Each player begins the game with one secret objective.
52.21 Each player can have up to three total scored and unscored 
secret objectives.
•	 If a player draws a secret objective and has more than three, 
he must choose one of his unscored secret objectives and 
return	it	to	the	deck.	Then,	he	shuffles	the	secret	objective	
deck.
52.22 A player can gain secret objectives by resolving either the 
primary or secondary ability of the “Imperial” strategy card.
RELATED TOPICS: Imperial, Status Phase, Victory Points
53 OPPONENT
During combat, a player’s opponent is the other player that either 
has ships in the system at the start of the space combat or has 
ground forces on the planet at the start of a ground combat.
53.1 A player who does not have units on either side of a combat is 
not an opponent. He cannot use abilities or have abilities used 
against him that are used against an opponent.
RELATED TOPICS: Ground Combat, Invasion, Space Combat
54 PDS
A PDS (planetary defense system) is a structure that allows a player 
to defend his territory against invading forces.
54.1 Each PDS has the “Space Cannon” ability.
54.2 The primary way by which players acquire PDS units is 
by resolving either the primary or secondary ability of the 
“Construction” strategy card.
54.3 A PDS unit is placed on a planet. Each planet can have a 
maximum of two PDS units.
54.4 If a player’s PDS is ever on a planet that contains a unit that 
belongs to another player and does not contain any of his own 
ground forces, that PDS is destroyed.
RELATED TOPICS: Structures, Space Cannon
•	 When a player scores an objective during the action phase, 
he can do so at any time during that phase.
52.6 A player can score a maximum of one public objective and one 
secret objective during each status phase.
52.7 A player can score any number of objectives during a turn of 
the action phase; however, he can only score one objective 
during each combat.
•	 A player can score an objective during both the space combat 
and the ground combat during the same tactical action.
52.8 A player can score each objective only once during the game.
52.9 If an objective requires a player to destroy one or more units, 
those units can be destroyed by producing hits against them, 
playing action cards, using technology, or any number of other 
abilities that use the “destroy” terminology.
•	 Forcing a player to remove a unit from the board by 
reducing	the	number	of	command	tokens	in	his	fleet	pool	
does not count as destroying a unit.
52.10 Players can score some objectives by spending resources, 
influence,	or	tokens,	as	described	by	the	objective	card.	To	
score	such	an	objective,	a	player	must	pay	the	specified	cost	at	
the time indicated on the card.
52.11 PUBLIC OBJECTIVES
A public objective is an objective that is 
revealed to all players.
52.12 When scoring a public objective, the 
player places one of his control tokens 
on that objective’s card. Then, he 
advances his control token on the victory 
point track a number of spaces equal to 
the number of victory points he gained.
52.13 Each game	contains	five	stage	I	and	five	stage	II	public	
objective cards that the speaker places facedown near the 
victory point track during setup.
•	 The speaker reveals two of the stage I objective cards 
during setup. All other objective cards remain facedown.
52.14 During each status phase, the speaker reveals a facedown 
public objective card.
•	 The speaker does not reveal stage II objective cards until all 
stage I objective cards are revealed.
52.15 If the speaker must reveal a facedown public objective card but 
all public objective cards are already revealed, the game ends 
immediately.
•	 The player with the most victory points is the winner. If one 
or more players are tied for having the most victory points, 
the	tied	player	who	is	first	in	initiative	order	is	the	winner.
52.16 A player cannot score public objectives if he does not control 
each of the planets in his home system.


18
56.3 If a war sun is in a system with any number of other players’ 
units that have the “Planetary Shield” ability, those units are 
treated as if they do not have that ability.
•	 Units treated as if they do not have a “Planetary Shield” 
ability cannot use the “Magen Defense Grid” technology.
•	 A war sun can use its “Bombardment” ability against planets 
that contain units that have the “Planetary Shield” ability.
RELATED TOPICS: Bombardment
57 POLITICS (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Politics” strategy card allows players to draw action cards. 
Additionally, the active player chooses a new speaker and may be able 
to look at cards in the agenda deck. This card’s initiative value is “3.”
57.1 During the action phase, if the active player has the “Politics” 
strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to resolve that 
card’s primary ability.
57. 2 To resolve the primary ability on the “Politics” strategy card, 
the active player resolves the following effects in order:
i. The active player chooses any player that does not 
have the speaker token. He may choose himself as 
long as he does not have the speaker token. The chosen 
player places the speaker token in his play area; he is 
now the speaker.
ii. The active player draws two action cards.
iii. The active player secretly looks at the top two cards of 
the agenda deck. Then, he places each card on either 
the top or the bottom of the deck. If he places both 
cards on either the top or bottom, he can place them in 
any order.
57. 3 After the active player resolves the primary ability of the 
“Politics” strategy card, each other player, beginning with the 
player to the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise, 
may spend one command token from his strategy pool to draw 
two action cards.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Cards, Agenda Card, Initiative Order, 
Speaker, Strategy Card, Strategic Action
58 PRODUCING UNITS
The primary way in which a player produces new units is by resolving 
the “Production” abilities of his units during a tactical action. 
However, other game effects also allow players to produce units.
58.1 Each unit that a player can produce has a cost value presented 
on its faction sheet or technology card. To produce a unit, 
a player must spend a number of resources from planets he 
controls equal to or greater than the cost value of the unit he is 
producing.
55 PLANETS
Planets provide players with resources and 
influence.	Planets	are	on	system	tiles	and	each	
has	a	name,	a	resource	value,	and	an	influence	
value. Some planets also have traits.
55.1 A planet’s resources are indicated by the 
upper-left value that is surrounded by a 
yellow border.
55.2 A planet’s	influence	is	indicated	by	the	
lower-right value that is surrounded by a 
blue border.
55.3 A planet’s trait has no inherent effects, but some game effects 
refer to a planet’s trait. There are three traits: cultural, 
hazardous, and industrial.
55.4 Some planets have a technology specialty, which allows 
those planets to be exhausted to satisfy a prerequisite when 
researching technology.
55.5 PLANET CARD
Each planet has a corresponding planet card that displays its name, 
resource	value,	influence	value,	and	trait,	if	it	has	one.	If	a	player	
controls a planet, he keeps that planet’s card in his play area.
55.6 A planet card has both a readied and exhausted state. When 
a planet is readied, it is placed faceup. When a planet is 
exhausted, it is placed facedown.
55.7 A player	can	spend	a	readied	planet’s	resources	or	influence.
55.8 A player cannot spend an exhausted planet’s resources or 
influence.
RELATED TOPICS:	Control,	Exhausted,	Influence,	Readied,	
Resources, System Tiles, Technology
56 PLANETARY SHIELD (UNIT ABILITY)
Units cannot use the “Bombardment” ability against a planet that 
contains a unit that has the “Planetary Shield” ability.
56.1 The “Planetary Shield” ability does not prevent a planet from 
being affected by the “X-89 Bacterial Weapon” technology.
56.2 The “Planetary Shield” ability prevents an L1Z1X player from 
using his “Harrow” faction ability.
The only inhabited world in a 
forgettable system. Few native 
resources and only rudimentary, often 
underdeveloped, industries.
0
1
LAZAR
A Cultural 
Planet
An Industrial 
Planet
A Hazardous 
Planet

19
•	 When	producing	fighters	or	infantry,	each	individual	unit	
counts toward the space dock’s production limit. If a 
player can only produce one unit but wishes to produce the 
aforementioned units, he may, but he produces only one 
unit despite paying the full cost.
59.2 When a player produces ships by using “Production,” he must 
place them in the active system.
59.3 When a player produces ground forces, he must place those unit 
on planets that contain a unit that used its “Production” ability.
59.4 If a player uses the “Production” ability of a unit in a space area  
of a system to produce ground forces, those ground forces may 
either be placed on a planet the player controls in that system or 
in the space area of that system.
•	 If a player places a ground force in the space area of a 
system, it cannot exceed that player’s capacity in that system.
RELATED TOPICS: Blockaded, Producing Units, Space Dock
60 PROMISSORY NOTES
Each player begins the game with one unique 
and four generic promissory note cards that 
he can give to other players.
60.1 Each promissory note contains timing 
text and ability text. A player can resolve 
any promissory note cards that he has by 
following the text on the card.
•	 Promissory notes are not mandatory 
unless	otherwise	specified.
60.2 A player cannot play his own promissory notes. Since the cards 
are only valuable to other players, promissory notes can be 
traded as powerful negotiation tools.
60.3 Promissory notes that are returned to a player are returned after 
their abilities have been completely resolved.
60.4 If a promissory note is returned to a player, that player may 
give it to other players again as part of a future transaction.
•	 An unrevealed promissory note is not subject to effects in its 
ability text that return the card if certain conditions are met.
60.5 When resolving a transaction, a player can trade a maximum 
of one promissory note from his hand to another player, even if 
that card originally belonged to another player.
•	 Promissory notes in the play area cannot be traded.
60.6 Players should keep their hands of promissory notes hidden.
60.7 If a player is eliminated, all of the promissory notes that match 
his color or faction are returned to the game box, including 
those that are in play or owned by other players.
•	 Other players’ promissory notes are returned to those players.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Elimination, Neighbors, Transactions
When the green player 
replenishes commodities:
The green player gives you all 
of his commodities. 
Then, return this card to the 
green player.
TRADE 
AGREEMENT
•	 Any resources spent in excess of a unit’s cost are lost.
•	 If a player is producing multiple units at a time, he can add 
the cost of all the units he is producing to create a total cost 
before he spends any resources.
58.2 If the cost is accompanied by two icons—typically for 
fighters	and	ground	forces—a	player	produces	two	of	that 	
unit for that cost.
•	 Each of the two units counts toward the total number of 
units a player can produce.
•	 A player can choose to produce only one unit; however, he 
must still pay the entire cost.
58.3 When a player produces a unit through the use of his units’ 
“Production” abilities during a tactical action, he follows the 
rules of the “Production” ability to determine where he can 
place his units in the active system.
58.4 When a player produces a unit through an ability outside of the 
tactical action, that ability will state where the player can place 
the units he is producing and how many units he can produce.
58.5 A player is limited by the number of units in his 
reinforcements.
•	 If he does not have enough units in his reinforcements, 
he can remove units from any systems that do not 
contain one of his command tokens and place them in his 
reinforcements. Then, he can produce any units that he 
removed. He cannot remove a unit in this way unless he is 
immediately producing a unit of that type.
•	 When	producing	a	fighter	or	infantry	unit,	he	can	use	a	
fighter	or	infantry	token,	as	appropriate,	from	the	supply	
instead of a plastic piece.
58.6 A player cannot use a blockaded unit to produce ships, but he 
can use it to produce ground forces.
RELATED TOPICS: Blockaded, Cost, Fighter Tokens, Infantry 
Tokens, Production, Space Dock, Tactical Action
59 PRODUCTION (UNIT ABILITY)
During the “Production” step of a tactical action, the active player 
can resolve the “Production” ability of each of his units that are in 
the active system in order to produce units.
59.1 A unit’s “Production” ability on its faction sheet is always 
followed by a value. This value is the maximum number of 
units that this unit can produce.
•	 If the active player has multiple units in the active system 
that have the “Production” ability, he can produce a 
number of units up to the combined total of all of his units’ 
production values in that system.

20
64.2 A player spends a planet’s resources by exhausting its card.
64.3 A player can spend a trade good as if it were one resource.
RELATED TOPICS: Exhausted, Planets, Producing Units, Trade 
Goods
65 SHIPS
A ship is a unit type consisting of carriers, cruisers, dreadnoughts, 
destroyers,	fighters,	and	war	suns.	Each	race	also	has	a	unique	
flagship.
65.1 Ships are always placed in space.
65.2 A player can have a number of ships in a system equal to or 
less	than	the	number	of	command	tokens	in	his	fleet	pool.
•	 Fighters	do	not	count	toward	the	fleet	pool	limit,	and	
instead count against a player’s capacity.
65.3 Ships can have any number of the following attributes: cost, 
combat, move, and capacity. These attributes are shown on both 
a ship’s faction sheet and a ship’s technology cards.
RELATED TOPICS: Capacity, Cost, Combat, Fleet Pool, Move, 
Space Combat, Units
66 SPACE CANNON (UNIT ABILITY)
A unit that has the “Space Cannon” ability can use it during two 
different steps of a player’s tactical action: after the “Move Ships” 
substep (Space Cannon Offense) and during an invasion (Space 
Cannon Defense).
66.1 A player is not required to be the active player to use the 
“Space Cannon” abilities of his units.
66.2 SPACE CANNON OFFENSE
During a tactical action, after the “Move Ships” substep of the 
“Movement” step, players can resolve the “Space Cannon” abilities 
of their units by performing the following steps:
66.3 STEP 1 — Beginning with the active player and proceeding 
clockwise, each player may use the “Space Cannon” ability 
of	each	of	his	units	in	the	active	system	by	rolling	a	specific	
number of dice for each of those units; these are called space 
cannon rolls. A hit is produced for each die roll that is equal to or 
greater than the unit’s “Space Cannon” value.
•	 If a unit has a “Space Cannon” ability, it is present on its 
faction sheet and technology cards.
•	 “Space Cannon” is displayed as “Space Cannon X (Y).” 
The X is the minimum value needed for a die to produce 
a hit, and Y is the number of dice rolled. Not all “Space 
Cannon” abilities are accompanied by a (Y) value; a space 
cannon roll for such a unit consists of one die.
61 READIED
Cards have a readied state, which indicates that a player can exhaust 
or resolve the abilities on those cards.
61.1 A card that is readied is placed faceup in a player’s play area; a 
card that is exhausted is placed facedown in a player’s area.
61.2 A player can exhaust a readied planet card to spend resources 
or	influence	from	that	card’s	planet.
61.3 A player can exhaust certain readied technology cards to 
resolve those cards’ abilities.
•	 Such	a	technology	will	specifically	instruct	a	player	to	
exhaust the card as part of the ability’s cost.
61.4 If a card is exhausted, a player cannot resolve that card’s abilities 
or	spend	resources	or	influence	on	that	card	until	it	is	readied.
61.5 During a “Ready Cards” step, each player readies all of his 
exhausted	cards	by	flipping	them	faceup.
61.6 When a player performs a strategic action, he exhausts his 
chosen strategy card.
•	 That card is later readied during the status phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Exhausted, Status Phase
62 REINFORCEMENTS
A player’s reinforcements are his personal supply of units and 
command tokens that are not on the game board or otherwise in use.
62.1 The components in a player’s reinforcements are limited.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Tokens, Component Limitations, Units
63 REROLLS
Some game effects instruct a player to reroll dice.
63.1 When a die is rerolled, its new result is used instead of its 
previous result.
63.2 The same ability cannot be used to reroll the same die multiple 
times, but multiple abilities can be used to reroll a single die.
63.3 Die rerolls must occur immediately after rolling the dice, before 
other abilities or dice rolls are resolved.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Action Cards, Ground Combat, Space 
Combat
64 RESOURCES
Resources represent a planet’s material value and industry. Many game 
effects, such as producing units, require players to spend resources.
64.1 A planet’s resources are the leftmost value that is surrounded 
by a yellow border on the planet’s system tile and planet card.

21
•	 If a player has the “Deep Space Cannon” technology, he can 
use the “Space Cannon” ability of his PDS units that are in 
systems that are adjacent to the active system. The hits are 
still assigned to units in the active system.
•	 Game effects that reroll, modify, or otherwise affect combat 
rolls do not affect space cannon rolls.
66.4 This ability can be used even if no ships were moved during the 
“Move Ships” step.
66.5 STEP 2  —The active player must choose and destroy one of his 
ships in the active system for each hit result produced against 
his units.
•	 If the active player is using the “Space Cannon” ability of 
his units, he chooses a player who has ships in the active 
system. That player must choose and destroy one of his 
ships in the active system for each hit the space cannon roll 
produced. 
66.6 SPACE CANNON DEFENSE
During the invasion step of a tactical action, after ground forces 
have been committed to land on planets, players other than the 
active player can resolve the “Space Cannon” abilities of their units 
on those planets by performing the following these steps:
66.7 STEP 1— Each player may use the “Space Cannon” ability of 
each	of	his	units	on	the	invaded	planet	by	rolling	a	specific	
number of dice for each of those units; this is called a space 
cannon roll. A hit is produced for each die roll that is equal to or 
greater than the unit’s “Space Cannon” value.
•	 If a unit has a “Space Cannon” ability, it is present on its 
faction sheet and technology cards.
•	 “Space Cannon” is displayed as “Space Cannon X (Y).” 
The X is the minimum value needed for a die to produce 
a hit, and Y is the number of dice rolled. Not all “Space 
Cannon” abilities are accompanied by a (Y) value; a space 
cannon roll for such a unit consists of one die.
•	 Game effects that reroll, modify, or otherwise affect combat 
rolls do not affect space cannon rolls.
•	 Game effects that allow the use of “Space Cannon” abilities 
against ships in adjacent systems have no effect during 
Space Cannon Defense.
66.8 STEP 2— The active player must choose and destroy one of his 
ground forces on the planet for each hit the space cannon roll 
produced.
•	 Hits can only be assigned to units that were committed 
to the same planet as the units using the “Space Cannon” 
ability.
RELATED TOPICS: Active System, Attacker, Defender, Destroyed, 
Invasion, Sustain Damage, Movement, Tactical Action

22
 - If a player has an ability that rerolls a die or affects a 
die after it is rolled, he must resolve such an ability 
immediately after rolling the die. For example, if the 
player made a combat roll for his destroyer, he must 
decide if he wants to use an ability to reroll that die 
before making a combat roll for his dreadnought.
 - The attacker makes all of his combat rolls during this 
step before the defender. This procedure is important for 
abilities that allow a player to reroll an opponent’s die.
67.6 STEP 4— ASSIGN HITS: Each player must choose and destroy 
one of his ships in the active system for each hit his opponent 
produced.
•	 Before assigning hits, players may use their units’ “Sustain 
Damage” abilities to cancel hits.
•	 When a unit is destroyed, the player who controls that 
unit removes it from the board and places it in his 
reinforcements.
67.7 STEP 5— RETREAT: If a player announced a retreat during the 
first	step	of	a	combat,	he	must	retreat.
•	 To retreat, a player takes all of his ships in the combat and 
move them to an adjacent system.
•	 The system that a player’s units retreat to must contain 
one or more of his units, a planet he controls, or both. 
Additionally, the system cannot contain ships controlled by 
another player.
•	 After retreating, a player must place a command token from 
his reinforcements in the system to which he retreated. If 
that system already contains one of his command tokens, he 
does not place an additional token there. If the player has 
no command tokens in his reinforcements, he must use one 
from his command sheet instead.
67. 8 After the “Retreat” step, if both players still have ships in the 
active system, they resolve another round of space combat 
beginning with the “Announce Retreats” step.
67.9 Space combat ends when only one player—or neither player—
has a ship in the active system.
67.10 After a combat ends, the player with one or more ships 
remaining in the system is the winner of the combat; the other 
player is the loser of the combat. If neither player has a ship 
remaining, the combat ends in a draw and there is no winner.
•	 If	the	winner	of	the	combat	has	fighters	or	ground	forces	in	
space that exceed his ships’ capacity in the active system, he 
must destroy the excess units of his choice.
RELATED TOPICS: Capacity, Fleet Pool, Opponent, Sustain 
Damage, Tactical Action, Transport
67 SPACE COMBAT
After resolving the “Space Cannon Offense” step of a tactical 
action, if two players have ships in the active system, those players 
must resolve a space combat.
67.1 If the active player is the only player with ships in the system, 
he skips the “Space Combat” step of the tactical action and 
proceeds to the “Invasion” step.
67. 2 If an ability occurs “before combat,” it occurs immediately 
before the “Anti-Fighter Barrage” step.
To resolve a space combat, players perform the following steps:
67. 3 STEP 1—ANTI-FIGHTER BARRAGE: If	this	is	the	first	round 	
of a space combat, the players may simultaneously use the 
“Anti-Fighter Barrage” ability of any of their units in the 
active system.
•	 If one or both players no longer have ships in the active 
system after resolving this step, the space combat ends 
immediately.
•	 Players cannot resolve “Anti-Fighter Barrage” abilities 
during	any	rounds	of	space	combat	other	than	the	first	round.
67.4 STEP 2—ANNOUNCE RETREATS:  Each player may 
announce a retreat, beginning with the defender.
•	 A retreat will not occur immediately; the units will retreat at 
the end of the combat round.
•	 If the defender announces a retreat, the attacker cannot 
announce a retreat during that combat round.
•	 If a player wishes to retreat with any of his ground forces 
that are on planets he controls in the active system, he may 
place those units in the space area of the active system 
during this step.
67. 5 STEP 3— ROLL DICE: Each player rolls one die for each ship 
he has in the active system; this is called a combat roll. If a 
unit’s combat roll produces a result that is equal to or greater 
than that unit’s combat value, that result produces a hit.
•	 If a unit’s combat value contains two or more burst icons, 
the player rolls one die for each burst icon instead.
•	 If a player has ships that have different combat values in the 
active system, he rolls these dice separately.
 - First, he should roll all dice for his units with a combat 
value of “1.” Then, he should roll all dice for his units with 
combat value of “2,” and then “3,” continuing in numerical 
order until he has rolled dice for each of his ships.
 - A player keeps track of the number of hits his combat 
rolls produce. The total number of hits he produces will 
destroy units during the “Assign Hits” step.

23
70 STATUS PHASE
During the status phase, players score objectives and prepare for 
the next game round. To resolve the status phase, players perform 
the following steps:
70.1 STEP 1—SCORE OBJECTIVES:  Following initiative order, 
each player may score up to one public objective and one secret 
objective	that	can	be	fulfilled	during	the	status	phase.	To	score	
an	objective,	he	must	fulfill	the	requirements	on	the	card;	if	he	
does, he gains a number of victory points indicated on the card.
70.2 STEP 2—REVEAL PUBLIC OBJECTIVE:  The speaker reveals 
an	unrevealed	public	objective	card	by	flipping	that	card	
faceup.
•	 The speaker cannot reveal “Stage II” objectives until all 
“Stage I” objectives are revealed.
•	 The game ends if there are no unrevealed public objectives 
at the start of this step.
70.3 STEP 3—DRAW ACTION CARDS:  Following initiative order, 
each player draws one action card.
70.4 STEP 4—REMOVE COMMAND TOKENS:  Each player 
removes all of his command tokens from the game board and 
returns them to his reinforcements.
70.5 STEP 5—GAIN AND REDISTRIBUTE COMMAND TOKENS:  
Each player gains two command tokens from his reinforcements. 
Then, he can redistribute all of the command tokens on his 
command sheet, including the two he just gained, among his 
strategy,	tactic,	and	fleet	pools.
•	 Players should remember to check the number of their ships 
in	each	system	after	reducing	the	size	of	their	fleet	pools.
•	 This step can usually be resolved simultaneously, but if 
there	is	a	timing	conflict,	it	is	resolved	in	initiative	order.
70.6 STEP 6— READY CARDS: Each player readies all of his 
exhausted cards, including strategy cards.
70.7 STEP 7— REPAIR UNITS: Each player repairs all of his units 
that have the “Sustain Damage” ability by turning those units 
upright.
70.8 STEP 8— RETURN STRATEGY CARDS: Each player returns 
his strategy card to the common play area. Then, if a player 
has removed the custodians token from Mecatol Rex, the game 
round continues to the agenda phase. Otherwise, a new game 
round begins with the strategy phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Cards, Agenda Phase, Custodians Token, 
Command Tokens, Game Round, Objective Cards, Readied, Sustain 
Damage, Strategy Card, Strategy Phase
68 SPACE DOCK
A space dock is a structure that allows players to produce units.
68.1 Each space dock has a “Production” ability that indicates the 
number of units it can produce.
68.2 The primary way in which players acquire space docks is 
by resolving either the primary or secondary abilities of the 
“Construction” strategy card.
68.3 Space docks are placed on planets. Each planet can have a 
maximum of one space dock.
68.4 If a player’s space dock is ever on a planet that contains a unit 
that belongs to another player and does not contain any of his 
own ground forces, that space dock is destroyed.
•	 The	Clan	of	Saar’s	“Floating	Factory”	faction-specific	space	
dock is destroyed when it is blockaded; that is to say, when 
it is in a system with another player’s ships and none of the 
Clan of Saar’s ships.
RELATED TOPICS: Construction, Producing Units, Structures
69 SPEAKER
The speaker is the player who has the speaker token.
69.1 During	the	strategy	phase,	the	speaker	is	the	first	player	to	
choose a strategy card.
69.2 During the agenda phase, the speaker reveals the top agenda 
card from the agenda deck before each vote. The speaker is 
always the last player to vote and decides which outcome to 
resolve if the outcomes are tied.
69.3 During setup, the speaker prepares the objectives.
69.4 During the status phase, the speaker reveals a public objective.
69.5 A random player gains the speaker token during setup before 
the game begins.
69.6 During the action phase, if a player resolves the primary ability 
on the “Politics” strategy card, he chooses any player other than 
the current speaker to gain the speaker token.
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Card, Agenda Phase, Objective Cards, 
Politics, Strategy Phase

24
72.7 A strategy card has both a primary ability and a secondary 
ability. These abilities are resolved during a strategic action.
72.8 Each strategy card exists in either the common play area or a 
player’s play area.
•	 Strategy cards in the common play area are available for 
players to choose during the strategy phase.
•	 A strategy card in a player’s play area belongs to that 
player until it is returned to the common play area during 
the status phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Construction, Diplomacy, Initiative Order, 
Imperial, Leadership, Politics, Strategy Phase, Technology (Strategy 
Card), Trade, Warfare
73 STRATEGY PHASE
During the strategy phase, each player chooses a strategy card to use 
during the round.
To resolve the strategy phase, players perform the following steps:
73.1 STEP 1— Starting with the speaker and proceeding clockwise, 
each player chooses one of the strategy cards from the common 
play area and places it faceup in his play area.
•	 If there are one or more trade good tokens on a strategy card 
when a player chooses it, he gains those trade goods.
•	 A player cannot choose a strategy card that another player 
has already chosen during the current strategy phase.
•	 When playing with three or four players, each player 
will choose a second strategy card. After the last player 
has	received	his	first	strategy	card,	each	player	chooses	
a second strategy card, starting with the speaker and 
proceeding clockwise.
73.2 STEP 2— The speaker places one trade good token from the 
supply on each strategy card that was not chosen.
•	 During a four-player game, all strategy cards will be 
chosen, and therefore no trade good tokens will be placed 
on strategy cards.
Then, players proceed to the action phase.
RELATED TOPICS: Game Round, Speaker, Strategy Card, Trade 
Goods
74 STRUCTURES
A structure is a type of unit. PDS units and space docks are 
structures.
74.1 Structures are always placed on planets.
•	 The	Clan	of	Saar’s	“Floating	Factory”	faction-specific	space	
dock is placed in a system’s space area.
71 STRATEGIC ACTION
During the action phase, the active player may perform a strategic 
action to resolve the primary ability on his strategy card.
71.1 After the active player resolves the primary ability on his 
strategy card, each other player, beginning with the player to 
the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise, may 
resolve that strategy card’s secondary ability.
•	 Players do not have to resolve the secondary abilities of the 
active player’s strategy card.
71.2 After each player has had an opportunity to resolve a strategy 
card’s secondary ability, the active player exhausts his strategy 
card so that it is facedown—this indicates that he cannot use 
this card again this round and is a reminder that he can now 
pass during one of his later turns.
•	 During three- and four-player games, a player must resolve 
strategic actions using both of his chosen strategy cards 
before he can pass.
71.3 When a player is resolving either the primary or secondary 
abilities from a strategy card, he resolves each of the ability’s 
effects from top to bottom.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Objective Cards, Strategy Card, 
Victory Points
72 STRATEGY CARD
Strategy cards determine initiative order 
and provide each player with a powerful 
ability that he can use one time during the 
action phase.
72.1 During the strategy phase, each player 
chooses a strategy card from the 
common play area and places it in his 
play area faceup.
72.2 Each strategy card has a readied and 
an exhausted side.
•	 The readied side contains the strategy card’s name, initiative 
number, and abilities.
•	 The exhausted side contains the strategy card’s initiative 
number.
72.3 A player can only resolve the primary ability of his own 
strategy cards.
72.4 A player can only resolve the secondary ability of strategy 
cards that were chosen by other players.
72.5 There are eight strategy cards, each of which has a name and an 
initiative number.
72.6 The initiative number on a player’s strategy card determines the 
initiative order for the action phase and status phase.
7
SECONDARY ABILITY:
SECONDARY ABILITY:
SECONDARY ABILITY:
✦
✦
 Spend 1 token from 
Spend 1 token from 
your strategy pool and 
your strategy pool and 
4 resources to research 
1 technology.
1 technology.
PRIMARY ABILITY:
PRIMARY ABILITY:
PRIMARY ABILITY:
PRIMARY ABILITY:
✦
✦
✦
✦
✦
 Research 1 technology.
Research 1 technology.
✦
✦
✦
✦
✦
✦
✦
 Spend 6 resources to research 
Spend 6 resources to research 
1 technology.
TECHNOLOGY
TECHNOLOGY
TECHNOLOGY
TECHNOLOGY
TECHNOLOGY


25
77. 3 System tiles with a blue-colored back each contain one or more 
planets.
77.4 System tiles with a red-colored back are anomalies or are 
systems that do not contain planets.
77. 5 Planets are located in systems. Ground forces and structures are 
always placed on planets.
77.6 Any area on a system tile that is not a planet is space. Ships are 
always placed in the space area.
RELATED TOPICS: Adjacency, Anomalies, Planets, Ships, 
Wormholes
78 TACTICAL ACTION
The tactical action is the primary method by which players produce 
units, move ships, and extend their dominion within the galaxy. To 
perform a tactical action, the active player performs the following steps:
78.1 STEP 1— ACTIVATION: The active player must activate a 
system that does not contain one of his command tokens.
•	 To activate a system, the active player places a command 
token from his tactic pool on that system. That system is the 
active system.
•	 Other players’ command tokens do not prevent a player 
from activating a system.
78.2 STEP 2— MOVEMENT: The active player may move any 
number	of	ships	with	a	sufficient	move	value	from	any	number	
of systems that do not contain one of his command tokens into 
the active system, following the rules for movement.
•	 Ships that have capacity values can transport ground forces 
and	fighters	when	moving.
•	 The player may choose to not move any ships.
•	 After the “Move Ships” step, all players can use the “Space 
Cannon” abilities of their units in the active system.
78.3 STEP 3—SPACE COMBAT:  If two players have ships in the 
active system, those players must resolve a space combat.
•	 If the active player is the only player with ships in the 
system, he skips this step.
78.4 STEP 4—INVASION:  The active player may use his 
“Bombardment” abilities, commit units to land on planets, and 
resolve ground combat against other players’ units.
78.5 STEP 5—PRODUCTION:  The active player may resolve the 
“Production” abilities of his units in the active system.
•	 The active player may do this even if he did not move units 
or land ground forces during this tactical action.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Active System, Anti-Fighter 
Barrage, Bombardment, Command Sheet, Ground Combat, 
Invasion, Movement, Producing Units, Transport, Space Cannon, 
Space Combat
74.2 Structures are primarily placed on planets using the 
“Construction” strategy card.
74.3 Structures cannot move or be transported.
74.4 A player can have a maximum of one space dock on each planet.
74.5 A player can have a maximum of two PDS units on each planet.
RELATED TOPICS: Construction, PDS, Units, Space Dock
75 SUPERNOVA
A supernova is an anomaly that affects movement.
75.1 A ship cannot move through or into a supernova.
RELATED TOPICS: Anomalies, Movement
76 SUSTAIN DAMAGE (UNIT ABILITY)
Some units have the “Sustain Damage” ability. Immediately before 
a player assigns damage to his units, he can use the “Sustain 
Damage” ability of any of his units in the active system.
76.1 For each “Sustain Damage” ability that a player uses, one hit 
produced by another player’s units is canceled. Then, each 
unit using this ability is placed on its side to indicate that it is 
damaged.
76.2 A damaged unit does not have reduced capabilities and is 
functionally the same as an undamaged unit, except that it 
cannot use the “Sustain Damage” ability.
76.3 A damaged unit cannot use the “Sustain Damage” ability until 
it is repaired during the status phase or by another game effect.
76.4 A unit can use its “Sustain Damage” ability any time a hit is 
produced against it. This includes hits produced during combat 
and from unit abilities such as the “Space Cannon” ability.
•	 A unit can only use the “Sustain Damage” ability if it 
is eligible to be hit. For example, a player cannot use a 
dreadnought’s “Sustain Damage” ability to cancel a hit from 
“Anti-Fighter Barrage.”
76.5 The “Sustain Damage” ability cannot be used to cancel an 
effect that directly destroys a unit.
76.6 The Barony of Letnev’s “Non-Euclidean Shielding” faction 
technology allows the Letnev player’s units with the “Sustain 
Damage” ability to cancel up to two hits instead of one.
RELATED TOPICS: Abilities, Ground Combat, Space Combat 
77 SYSTEM TILES
A system tile represents an area of the galaxy. Players place system 
tiles during setup to create the game board.
77.1 The back of each system tile is colored green, blue, or red.
77. 2 System tiles with a green-colored back are home systems. Each 
home system is unique to one of the game’s factions.

26
79.9 RESEARCHING TECHNOLOGY
A player can research technology by resolving either the primary 
or secondary ability of the “Technology” strategy card during the 
action phase. Other game effects may also instruct a player to 
research technology.
79.10 To research technology, a player gains that technology card 
from his technology deck and places it in his play area near his 
faction sheet.
•	 Players place any unit upgrades they gain faceup on their 
faction sheets, covering the unit that shares a name with that 
upgrade card.
79.11 A player cannot research a faction technology that does not 
match his faction.
79.12 When researching technology, a player must satisfy each 
of a technology’s prerequisites to research it. To satisfy a 
technology’s prerequisites, he must own one technology of the 
matching color for each prerequisite symbol on the technology 
card he wishes to research.
•	 Prerequisites symbols are displayed as symbols on the 
lower-left corner of the card.
•	 Unit upgrade technologies do not have a color and do not 
satisfy prerequisites.
•	 Players may use certain abilities or technology specialties to 
ignore some prerequisites.
79.13 TECHNOLOGY SPECIALTIES
A technology specialty is a technology symbol found on some planets.
79.14 When researching technology, a player can exhaust a planet 
he controls that has a technology specialty to ignore one 
prerequisite symbol of the matching type on the technology 
card he is researching.
79.15 If the planet card is already exhausted, it cannot be used to 
ignore a prerequisite.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Tokens, Exhausted, Initiative Order, 
Resources, Strategic Action, Strategy Card, Technology (Strategy 
Card), Unit Upgrades
79 TECHNOLOGY
Technology cards allow players to 
upgrade units and acquire powerful 
abilities.
79.1 Each player places any 
technologies he has gained faceup 
near his faction sheet. He owns 
those cards for the duration of the  
game and can use their abilities.
79.2 A player does not own the technology cards in his 
technology deck.
79.3 A player can gain technology cards from his technology deck 
by researching technology.
•	 Both the primary and secondary abilities of the “Technology” 
strategy card allow a player to research a technology.
79.4 Any technology cards that a player has not gained remain in 
his technology deck. A player can look through his technology 
deck at any time.
79.5 If an ability instructs a player to gain a technology, he does not 
research it; he takes it from his technology deck and places it in 
his play area, ignoring prerequisites.
79.6 Some technologies are unit upgrades. Unit upgrades share a 
name with a unit that is printed on a player’s faction sheet.
•	 Players place any unit upgrades they gain faceup on their 
faction sheets, covering the unit that shares a name with that 
upgrade card.
79.7 Each technology that is not a unit upgrade has a colored symbol 
displayed in the lower-right corner of the card and on its card 
back that indicates that technology’s color.
•	 A technology’s color has no inherent game effect; however, 
each technology a player owns can satisfy a prerequisite of 
a matching color when researching other technology.
•	 Unit upgrades do not have a color and do not satisfy 
prerequisites.
•	 There are four colors of technologies as follows:
79.8 Most technology cards have a column of colored symbols 
displayed in the lower-left corner of the card. Each symbol in 
this column is a prerequisite.
•	 A technology card’s prerequisites indicate the number and 
color of technologies a player must own to research that 
technology card.
You may exhaust this card before 1 or  
more of your units use SPACE CANNON;  
hits produced by those units must be 
assigned to non-fighter ships if able.
GRAVITON LASER SYSTEM
Biotic
 Cybernetic
Propulsion
Warfare

27
82 TRADE GOODS
A trade good represents a player’s buying and 
trading power beyond his planet’s raw resources.
82.1 Trade goods and commodities are represented 
by opposite sides of the same token.
82.2 When a player gains a trade good, he takes a 
trade good token from the supply and places it on the trade 
good area on his command sheet, making sure the trade good 
side is faceup.
82.3 A player can spend trade goods at any time during the game.
82.4 A player can spend a trade good in one of the following ways:
•	 In place of spending one resource.
•	 In	place	of	spending	one	influence.	However,	trade	goods	
cannot be spent to cast votes during the agenda phase.
•	 To	resolve	an	effect	that	specifically	requires	that	a	trade	
good be spent.
82.5 A player can exchange his trade goods with other players 
during a transaction.
82.6 When a player receives a commodity token from another 
player, the player who received that token places it in his trade 
good area with the trade good side of the token faceup.
•	 That token is no longer a commodity token; it is a trade 
good token.
82.7 Trade good tokens come in values of one and three. A player 
can swap between these tokens as necessary.
RELATED TOPICS:	Commodities,	Deals,	Influence,	Resources,	
Transactions
80 TECHNOLOGY (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Technology” strategy card allows players to research new 
technology. This card’s initiative value is “7.”
80.1 During the action phase, if the active player has the 
“Technology” strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to 
resolve that card’s primary ability.
80.2 To resolve the primary ability on the “Technology” strategy 
card, the active player can research one technology of his 
choice. Then, he may spend six resources to research one 
additional technology of his choice.
80.3 After the active player resolves the primary ability of the 
“Technology” strategy card, each other player, beginning 
with the player to the left of the active player and proceeding 
clockwise, may spend one command token from his strategy 
pool and four resources to research one technology of his choice.
RELATED TOPICS: Initiative Order, Resources, Strategic Action, 
Strategy Card, Technology
81 TRADE (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Trade” strategy card allows players to gain trade goods and 
replenish commodities. This card’s initiative value is “5.” 
81.1 During the action phase, if the active player has the “Trade” 
strategy card, he can perform a strategic action to resolve that 
card’s primary ability. To resolve the primary ability on the 
“Trade” strategy card, the active player resolves the following 
effects in order:
81.2 STEP 1— The active player gains 3 trade goods.
81.3 STEP 2— The active player replenishes his commodities by 
taking the number of commodity tokens necessary so that he 
has an amount equal to the commodity value on his faction 
sheet. Then, he places those tokens in the commodity area of 
his faction sheet.
•	 A player cannot have more commodities than the 
commodity value printed on his faction sheet.
81.4 STEP 3— The active player chooses any number of other 
players. Those players use the secondary ability of this card 
without spending a command token.
•	 The chosen players must use the secondary ability.
•	 The chosen players can only use the secondary ability once, 
and they cannot use it by spending command tokens.
81.5 After the active player resolves the primary ability of the 
“Trade” strategy card, each other player, beginning with the 
player to the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise, 
may spend one command token from his strategy pool to 
replenish his commodities.
RELATED TOPICS: Command Tokens, Commodities, Initiative 
Order, Strategic Action, Strategy Card, Trade Goods

28
84 TRANSPORT
When	a	ship	moves,	it	may	transport	any	combination	of	fighters	
and ground forces, but the number of units it transports cannot 
exceed that ship’s capacity value.
84.1 The ship	can	pick	up	and	transport	fighters	and	ground	forces	
when it moves. During a tactical action, it can pick up and 
transport units from the active system, the system it started its 
movement in, and each system it moves through.
•	 These transported units can only be dropped off in the 
active system.
84.2 Any	fighters	and	ground	forces	that	a	ship	transports	must	
move with the ship and remain in the space area of a system.
84.3 Fighters and ground forces cannot be picked up from a system 
that contains one of their faction’s command tokens other than 
the active system.
84.4 A player can land ground forces on a planet in a system during 
the “Invasion” step of a tactical action.
RELATED TOPICS: Capacity, Invasion, Movement, Tactical Action
85 UNITS
A	unit	is	represented	by	a	plastic	figure.
85.1 There are three types of units: ships, ground forces, and 
structures.
85.2 Each color of plastic comes with the following units:
•	 3 Space Docks
•	 6 PDS units
•	 8 Destroyers
•	 8 Cruisers
•	 2 War Suns
•	 12 Infantry 
•	 10 Fighters
•	 4 Carriers
•	 5 Dreadnoughts
•	 1 Flagship
85.3 Units exist either on the game board or in a player’s 
reinforcements.
RELATED TOPICS: Ground Forces, Ships, Structures
83 TRANSACTIONS
A transaction is a way for a player to exchange commodities, trade 
goods, and promissory notes.
83.1 During the active player’s turn, he may resolve up to one 
transaction with each of his neighbors.
•	 A player can resolve a transaction at any time during his 
turn, even during a combat.
83.2 To resolve a transaction, a player gives any number of trade 
goods and commodities and up to one promissory note to 
a neighbor in exchange for any number of trade goods and 
commodities and up to one promissory note.
83.3 Players can exchange commodities, trade goods and promissory 
notes, but cannot exchange other types of cards or tokens.
•	 The Emirates of Hacan can also exchange action cards with 
other players as part a transactions.
83.4 A transaction does not have to be even. A player may exchange 
components of unequal value or give components without 
receiving something in return.
•	 The players agree on the terms of the transaction before 
exchanging any components. After the components are 
traded, the transaction cannot be undone.
83.5 Players can resolve a transaction as part of a deal.
83.6 During each “V ote” step of the agenda phase, a player may 
perform one transaction with each other player, even if those 
players are not his neighbors.
RELATED TOPICS: Commodities, Deals, Neighbors, Promissory 
Notes, Trade Goods

29
87.7 The game ends as soon as one player has 10 victory points. If 
two players would gain 10 victory points during the same status 
phase, the player who is earlier in initiative order is the winner, 
because	he	has	the	opportunity	to	score	objectives	first.
87. 8 If the game ends because the speaker cannot reveal an objective 
card, the player with the most victory points is the winner. If 
one or more players are tied for having the most victory points, 
the	tied	player	who	is	first	in	initiative	order	is	the	winner.	
RELATED TOPICS: Agenda Card, Imperial, Objective Cards
88 WARFARE (STRATEGY CARD)
The “Warfare” strategy card allows a player to remove a command 
token from the board and redistribute the command tokens in his 
command pools. This card’s initiative value is “6.” During the 
action phase, if the active player has the “Warfare” strategy card, he 
can perform a strategic action to resolve that card’s primary ability.
To resolve the primary ability on the “Warfare” strategy card, the 
active player performs the following steps:
88.1 STEP 1— The active player removes any one of his command 
tokens from the game board. Then, he gains that command 
token by placing it in one of the pools of his command sheet.
88.2 STEP 2— The active player can redistribute the command 
tokens among the pools on his command sheet.
88.3 After the active player resolves the primary ability of the 
“Warfare” strategy card, each other player, beginning with the 
player to the left of the active player and proceeding clockwise, 
may spend one command token from his strategy pool to 
resolve the “Production” ability of one unit in his home system.
•	 The command token is not placed in his home system.
RELATED TOPICS: Action Phase, Command Tokens, Initiative 
Order, Strategy Card, Strategic Action
89 WORMHOLES
Some systems contain wormholes. Systems that contain identical 
wormholes are adjacent.
89.1 There are two basic types of wormholes: alpha and beta.
89.2 PDS units that have been upgraded by the “PDS II—Deep 
Space Cannon” unit upgrade technology can use their “Space 
Cannon” abilities through wormholes.
89.3 Players can be neighbors and perform transactions through 
wormholes.
89.4 There is one advanced type of wormhole: delta. This wormhole 
follows all normal wormhole rules.
•	 This wormhole is present on the Creuss Gate system tile 
and the Ghosts of Creuss home system tile.
RELATED TOPICS: Adjacency, Movement, Neighbors, System Tiles
86 UNIT UPGRADES
A unit upgrade is a type of technology card.
86.1 Unit upgrades share a name with a unit that is printed on a 
player’s faction sheet, but have a higher roman numeral. For 
example, a player’s “Carrier I” unit is upgraded by the unit 
upgrade technology “Carrier II.”
•	 The Nekro Virus faction may upgrade his units with units of 
the same type, (for example, “dreadnought” or “infantry”) 
even if their names do not match. If the Nekro Virus gains 
a unit upgrade technology of the same unit type of a unit 
upgrade technology he already has, the previous upgrade is 
overwritten, and he must use the same Valefar Assimilator 
token as was used to copy the previous upgrade.
86.2 Players place unit upgrades they gain faceup on their faction 
sheets, covering the unit that shares a name with that upgrade card.
86.3 The white arrows next to an attribute on a faction sheet indicate 
that the attribute will improve when the unit is upgraded.
86.4 After a player gains a unit upgrade card, each of that player’s 
units that correspond to that upgrade card is treated as having 
the attributes and abilities printed on that upgrade card. Any 
previous attributes of that unit, such as the one printed on that 
player’s faction sheet, are ignored.
RELATED TOPICS: Technology
87 VICTORY POINTS
The	first	player	to	gain	10	victory	points	wins	the	game.
87.1 Players gain victory points in a variety of ways. A common way 
that a player can gain victory points is by scoring objectives.
87. 2 Each player uses the victory point track to indicate how many 
victory points he has gained.
•	 If the players are using the 14-space side of the victory 
point track, the game ends and a player wins when he has 
14 victory points instead of 10.
87. 3 Each player places one of his control tokens on space “0” of the 
victory point track during setup.
87.4 When a player gains a victory point, he advances his control 
token a number of spaces along the victory point track equal to 
the number of victory points he gained.
•	 A player’s control token must always be on the space of the 
victory point track that shows a number that matches the 
number of victory points he has gained during the game. A 
player cannot have more than 10 victory points.
87. 5 If an ability refers to the player with the “most” or “fewest” 
victory points, and more than one player is tied in that respect, 
the effect applies to all of the tied players.
87.6 If a player gains a victory point from a law, and that law is 
discarded, he does not lose that victory point.

30
A
abilities, 1.19
action card, 2.6
“action” effects, 1.3
“after” effects, 1.14
agenda card, 1.20
“cannot” effects, 1.4
complete resolution, 1.7, 1.8
component action, 1.3
cost, 1.9, 1.10
objectives, 52.10
“end of turn” effects, 36.3
faction abilities, 1.21
mandatory, 1.6
movement, 49.8, 49.9
opponent, 53.1
partial resolution, 1.7
promissory notes, 60.1–60.3
“this system or planet” effects, 
1.23
timing, 1.11
unit abilities, 1.8
anti-fighter	barrage,	10.0
bombardment, 15.0
“when” effects, 1.13, 1.14
action cards, 2.0
canceling, 2.8
component action, 21.1
drawing, 2.1–2.3
hand size, 2.4
hidden, 2.5
multiple at same time, 2.9, 2.10
playing, 2.7
“action” effects
component action, 21.1
action phase, 3.0
active player, 4.1
component action, 21.0
initiative order, 43.0
movement, 49.0
passing, 3.2–3.5
player turns, 3.0
strategic action, 71.0
tactical action, 78.0
turn order, 3.0
actions
component action, 21.0
strategic action, 71.0
tactical action, 78.0
activation, 78.1
active player, 4.0
active system, 5.0
activation, 5.1–5.3
duration, 5.4
adjacency, 6.0
neighbors, 51.0
system adjacency, 6.0
unit and planet adjacency, 6.2
wormhole, 6.1
agenda cards, 7.0
agenda phase, 8.0
directives, 7.7, 7.8
resolving, 7.8
laws, 7.2–7.6
attach, 12.0
ownership, 7.4
resolving “Against” outcomes, 
7.6
resolving “For” outcomes, 7.3
outcomes, 8.17
resolving, 8.2
types, 7.1
voting, 8.5
agenda phase, 8.0
added to game round, 26.4
first	agenda,	8.2
ready planets, 8.4
resolving, 8.2–8.4
revealing agenda, 8.2
second agenda, 8.3
skipped during early game, 8.1
voting, 8.5–8.16
anomalies, 9.0
asteroid	field,	11.0
gravity rift, 37.0
nebula, 50.0
supernova, 75.0
types, 9.2, 9.3
anti-fighter	barrage,	10.0
anti-fighter	barrage	roll,	10.1
assigning hits, 10.2
rerolls, 10.1
resolving, 10.1, 10.2
values, 10.1
asteroid	field,	11.0
ship movement, 11.1
attach, 12.0
attaching a card, 12.1
attacker, 13.0
attribute
capacity, 16.0
combat, 17.0
cost, 25.0
move, 48.0
B
blockaded, 14.0
bombardment, 15.0
assigning hits, 15.2
bombardment roll, 15.1
“Harrow” ability, 15.1
multiple planets, 15.1
planetary shield, 56.0
rerolls, 15.1
resolving, 15.1, 15.2
values, 15.1
C
cancel
action cards, 2.8
capacity, 16.0
excess units, 16.3
limitations, 16.2
transport, 16.1
cards
action cards, 2.0
agenda card, 7.0
objective cards, 52.0
planet cards, 55.5
promissory notes, 60.0
strategy cards, 72.0
construction, 23.0
diplomacy, 30.0
leadership, 45.0
technology cards, 79.0
casting votes, 8.6–8.17
combat
attacker, 13.0
attribute, 17.0
burst icons, 17.2
defender, 28.0
ground combat, 38.0
opponent, 53.0
space combat, 67.0
command sheet, 18.0
command tokens, 18.1
fleet	pool,	34.0
placement, 18.3
trade goods, 18.2
command tokens, 19.0
command sheet, 18.0
gaining, 19.2, 19.3
placement, 19.1
redistributing, 70.5
removing command tokens, 70.4
strategic action, 19.5
system activation, 5.1
tactical action, 19.4
transporting, 84.3
commodities, 20.0
converting, 20.5, 20.6
faction sheet, 20.2
replenishing, 20.3, 20.4
spending, 20.7
tokens, 20.1
“Trade” strategy card, 81.3
transaction, 20.5
component action, 21.0
complete resolution, 21.3
resolving, 21.2, 21.3
component limitations, 22.0
cards, 22.5
dice, 22.1
tokens, 22.2
units, 22.4
“Construction” strategy card, 23.0
primary ability, 23.1, 23.2
resolving, 23.2
secondary ability, 23.3
resolving, 23.3
structure placement, 23.4
control
planets, 24.0
gaining control, 24.1, 24.2
indicating control, 24.3
losing control, 24.5–24.7
player structures, 44.5
control tokens
planets without units, 24.4
public objectives, 52.12
secret objective, 52.18
victory point track, 87.3
cost
abilities, 1.9
exhausting, 32.4
objectives, 52.10
attribute, 25.0
fighters,	58.2
ground forces, 58.2
producing units, 58.1
structures, 25.3
cultural planet, 55.3
custodians token, 26.0
invasion, 26.2
movement, 26.1
placement, 46.1
removing, 26.2, 26.3
victory point, 26.3
D
damaged units, 76.0–76.2
deals, 27.0
binding, 27.3
including transactions, 27.1
non-binding, 27.4
timing, 27.1
decks
depleted, 22.5
defender, 28.0
destroyed, 29.0
assigning hits, 29.1
fleet	pool	limitation,	34.3
gravity rift, 37.2
ground combat, 38.2
objectives, 52.9
PDS, 54.4
planet control
space cannon defense, 66.8
space cannon offense, 66.5
space dock, 68.4
structures
planet control, 44.5
sustain damage, 76.5
dice
anti-fighter	barrage	roll,	10.1
bombardment roll, 15.1
combat roll
ground combat, 38.1
component limitations, 22.1
rerolls, 63.0
multiple rerolls, 63.2
reroll results, 63.1
reroll timing, 63.3
space cannon roll
space cannon defense, 66.7
space cannon offense, 66.3
“Diplomacy” strategy card, 30.0
primary ability, 30.1, 30.2
resolving, 30.2
secondary ability
resolving, 30.3
directives, 7.7, 7.8
resolving, 7.8
E
elimination, 31.0
conditions for elimination, 31.1
owned agendas, 31.3
player’s components, 31.2
promissory notes, 31.4
ending the game
cannot reveal objective, 52.15
end of game, 87.7, 87.8
exhausted, 32.0
exhausting cards, 32.1
planet cards, 55.6
readying cards, 32.2
spending	influence,	32.3
spending resources, 32.3
strategy cards, 32.5
F
faction sheets
capacity, 16.0
combat, 17.0
commodities, 20.2
component action, 21.1
cost, 25.0
move, 48.0
white arrows, 86.3
fighters
fighter	tokens,	33.0
fighter	tokens,	33.0
fleet	pool,	34.0
command sheet, 18.0
command token placement, 34.2
destroying ships, 34.3
non-fighter	ship	limitation,	34.1
spending command tokens, 34.4
four-player game
choosing strategy cards, 73.1
initiative order, 43.3
passing, 3.4
G
game board, 35.0
Ghosts of Creuss, 35.1
Mecatol Rex, 46.0
game end, 52.15
game round, 36.0
action phase, 3.0
agenda phase, 8.0
status phase, 70.0
strategy phase, 73.0
gravity rift, 37.0
destroying ships, 37.2
ship movement, 37.1
ground combat, 38.0
assign hits, 38.2
attacker, 13.0
combat roll, 38.1
defender, 28.0
destroying units, 38.2
ending, 38.4
control, 44.5
opponent, 53.0
resolving, 38.1, 38.2
roll dice, 38.1
units remaining
both players, 38.3
neither player, 38.4
one player, 38.4
ground forces, 39.0
committing ground forces, 44.2
limitations, 39.3
placement, 39.1, 39.2
H
hazardous planet, 55.3
I
“Imperial” strategy card, 40.0
resolving, 40.2
secondary ability, 40.3
secret objective limitation, 40.4
industrial planet, 55.3
infantry, 39.0
infantry tokens, 41.0
infantry tokens, 41.0
influence,	42.0
spending	influence,	42.2
custodians token, 26.2
objectives, 52.10
voting, 8.6
spending trade goods, 42.3
value, 42.1
initiative order, 43.0
invasion, 44.0
bombardment, 15.0
resolving, 44.1, 44.2
commit ground forces, 44.2
establish control, 44.5
ground combat, 38.0
resolving, 38.1
resolving, 44.1–44.5
space cannon defense, 66.6
resolving, 66.7, 66.8
L
laws, 7.2–7.6
attach, 12.0
effects after discarding, 7.5
ownership, 7.4
resolving “Against” outcomes, 7.6
resolving elections, 7.3
resolving “For” outcomes, 7.3
“Leadership” strategy card, 45.0
command token placement, 45.4
primary ability, 45.1, 45.2
resolving, 45.2
secondary ability, 45.3
M
“may” effects, 1.5
Mecatol Rex, 46.0
INDEX
This index refers to paragraph numbers instead of page numbers. The number listed after each entry corresponds to a paragraph number in the 
glossary. The relevant information for that entry can be found in the paragraph sharing that number or in a bullet point following that paragraph.

31
modifiers,	47.0
movement
gravity rift, 37.1
notation, 47.1, 47.2
space combat
nebula, 50.3
movement, 49.0
ability movement, 49.8, 49.9
tactical action movement, 49.2
move value, 49.3, 49.4
restrictions, 49.4
transport, 84.1
N
nebula, 50.0
defender, 28.0
ship movement, 50.1, 50.2
neighbors, 51.0
Ghosts of Creuss, 51.3
wormholes, 51.2
O
objective cards, 52.0
public objectives, 52.11
cannot reveal, 52.15
home system control, 52.16
organization, 52.13–52.15
revealing, 52.14
scoring, 52.12
requirements, 52.4
scoring
general, 52.5–52.8
limitations, 52.6–52.8
public objectives, 52.12
secret objectives, 52.18, 52.19
secret objectives, 52.17
gaining, 52.20, 52.21
limitation, 40.4
timing, 52.3
types, 52.1
victory points, 52.2
opponent, 53.0
outcomes, 8.17
predictions, 8.22
resolving, 8.18
ties, 8.19
P
passing
action phase, 3.2–3.5
PDS, 54.0
acquiring, 54.2
“Construction” strategy card, 54.2
deep space cannon, 89.2
number per planet, 74.5
placement, 54.3
phases
action phase, 3.0
agenda phase, 8.0
status phase, 70.0
strategy phase, 73.0
planetary shields
war suns, 56.3
planetary shield, 56.0
“Harrow” ability, 56.2
X-89 Bacterial Weapon, 56.1
planet card, 55.5
attach, 12.1, 12.2
control, 55.5
exhausted, 55.6
readied, 55.6
planets, 55.0
influence,	55.2
spending, 55.7
resource, 55.1
resources, 64.0
spending, 55.8
technology specialty, 55.4
traits, 55.3
player turns, 3.0
initiative order, 43.0
“Politics” strategy card, 57.0
primary ability, 57.1, 57.2
resolving, 57.2
secondary ability, 57.3
resolving, 57.3
predictions, 8.22
prerequisites, 79.8
primary ability, 40.1, 40.2
producing units, 58.0
blockaded space docks, 58.6
cost, 58.1
fighters,	58.2
ground forces, 58.2
placement, 58.3, 58.4
reinforcement limitations, 58.5
production, 59.0
blockaded, 14.1
unit placement, 59.2–59.4
value, 59.1
promissory notes, 60.0
player elimination, 60.7
resolving, 60.1–60.3
transactions, 60.4–60.6
public objectives, 52.11
cannot reveal, 52.15
home system control, 52.16
organization, 52.13
revealing, 52.14
scoring, 52.12
R
readied, 61.0
readying cards, 61.5
reinforcements, 62.0
command tokens, 19.0
component limitation, 19.3
units, 85.3
repair, 70.7
replenish commodities, 20.3, 20.4
reroll
multiple rerolls, 63.2
timing, 63.3
rerolls, 63.0
results, 63.1
researching technology, 79.9–79.12
tech specialties, 79.10–79.12
resources, 64.0
spending resources
objectives, 52.10
spending trade goods, 64.3
retreat, 67.7
rolls
anti-fighter	barrage	roll,	10.1
bombardment rolls, 15.1
combat roll
ground combat, 38.1
space cannon roll
space cannon offense, 66.3
space cannon rolls
space cannon defense, 66.7
round, 36.0
S
secondary ability, 72.7
secret objectives, 52.17
gaining, 52.20
limitation, 40.4
scoring, 52.18, 52.19
setup, page 2
ships, 65.0
attributes, 65.3
number per system, 65.2
placement, 65.1
space cannon, 66.0
PDS, 54.1
space cannon defense, 66.6
assigning hits, 66.8
resolving, 66.7, 66.8
value, 66.7
space cannon offense, 66.2
assigning hits, 66.5
resolving, 66.3, 66.4
space cannon roll, 66.3
value, 66.3
space cannon defense
space cannon roll, 66.7
space cannon offense
space combat, 67.0
announce retreats, 67.4
anti-fighter	barrage,	66.8
assigning hits, 67.6
attacker, 13.0
defender, 28.0
opponent, 53.0
resolving, 67.3–67.7
retreat, 67.7
roll dice, 67.5
space dock, 68.0
acquiring, 68.2
number per planet, 74.4
placement, 68.3
“Production” ability, 68.1
speaker, 69.0
public objective
cannot reveal, 52.16
organization, 52.13
revealing, 52.14
ties during a vote, 8.19
status phase, 70.0
draw action cards, 70.3
gaining command tokens, 70.5
ready cards, 70.6
redistributing command tokens, 
70.5
remove command tokens, 70.4
repair units, 70.7
resolving, 70.1–70.8
return strategy cards, 70.8
reveal public objective, 70.2
score objective, 70.1
strategic action, 71.0
primary ability, 71.0
resolving strategy card, 71.3, 71.4
secondary ability, 71.1
strategy cards, 72.0
choosing, 72.1
“Construction” card, 23.0
“Diplomacy” card, 30.0
exhausted, 72.2
“Imperial” card, 40.0
initiative numbers, 72.5, 72.6
“Leadership” card, 45.0
placement, 72.8
“Politics” card, 57.0
primary abilities, 72.7
readied, 72.2
secondary abilities, 72.7
“Technology” card, 80.0
“Trade” card, 81.0
“Warfare” card, 88.0
strategy phase, 73.0
choosing strategy cards, 73.1
placing trade goods, 73.2
resolving, 73.1, 73.2
strategy pool
command sheet, 18.0
structures, 74.0
movement, 74.3
PDS, 54.0
acquiring, 54.4
deep space cannon, 89.2
number per planet, 74.5
placement, 54.4
placement, 74.1
space dock, 68.0
acquiring, 68.2
number per planet, 74.4
placement, 68.3
supernova, 75.0
ship movement, 75.1
sustain damage, 76.0
canceling hits, 76.1
damaged unit, 76.1–76.3
destroyed, 76.5
resolving, 76.1
timing, 76.4
system capacity
system tiles, 77.0
activation, 78.1
anomalies, 9.0
asteroid	fields,	9.0
gravity rifts, 9.0
nebula, 9.0
supernova, 9.0
game board, 35.0
identifying, 77.1–77.4
planets, 55.0
T
tactical action, 78.0
invasion, 44.0
movement, 49.2
production, 59.0
resolving, 78.1–78.6
space cannon offense, 66.2
space combat, 67.0
tactic pool
command sheet, 18.0
technology cards, 79.0
capacity, 16.0
colors, 79.7
combat, 17.0
component action, 21.1
cost, 25.0
gaining cards, 79.3–79.5
move, 48.0
owning cards, 79.1, 79.2
prerequisites, 79.8
researching technology, 
79.9–79.12
tech specialties, 79.10–79.12
unit upgrades, 79.6
“Technology” strategy card, 80.0
primary ability, 80.1, 80.2
resolving, 80.2
secondary ability, 80.3
resolving, 80.3
three-player game
choosing strategy cards, 73.1
initiative order, 43.3
passing, 3.4
tokens
command tokens, 19.0
commodity tokens, 20.0
control tokens
planets without units, 24.4
public objectives, 52.12
secret objective, 52.18
victory point track, 87.3
custodians token, 26.0
fighter	tokens,	33.0
infantry tokens, 41.0
spending
objectives, 52.10
trade good tokens, 82.0
trade goods, 82.0
command sheet, 18.0
converting, 20.5, 20.6
gaining, 82.2
spending, 82.3, 82.4
strategy phase, 73.2
tokens, 82.1
transaction, 82.5
“Trade” strategy card, 81.0
gaining trade goods, 81.2
primary ability, 81.1
resolving, 81.2–81.4
replenishing commodities, 81.3
secondary ability, 81.5
resolving, 81.5
traits, 55.3
transactions, 83.0
deals, 27.0
neighbors, 83.2
resolving, 83.2–83.5
timing, 83.1
transport, 84.0
capacity, 16.1
movement, 84.1
resolving, 84.1, 84.2
transporting
command tokens, 84.3
transport
invasion, 84.4
turns, 3.0
initiative order, 43.0
 
U
unit abilities
anti-fighter	barrage,	10.0
bombardment, 15.0
planetary shield, 56.0
space cannon, 66.0
sustain damage, 76.0
units, 85.0
damage
damaged, 76.0–76.2
ground forces, 39.0
PDS, 54.0
acquiring, 54.4
deep space cannon, 89.2
number per planet, 74.5
placement, 54.4
producing, 58.0
repairing, 70.7
ships, 65.0
number per system, 65.2
placement, 65.1
space dock, 68.0
acquiring, 68.2
number per planet, 74.4
placement, 68.3
types, 85.1
unit upgrades, 86.0
capacity, 16.0
combat, 17.0
cost, 25.0
effects, 86.4
move, 48.0
Nekro Virus, 86.1
placement, 86.2
white arrows, 86.3
V
victory points, 87.0
custodians token, 26.3
fewest, 87.5
gaining victory points, 87.4
laws, 87.6
most, 87.5
objective cards, 52.2
victory point track, 87.2
voting, 8.5
abstaining, 8.14
casting additional votes, 8.15
declaring outcome, 8.12
exhausting planets, 8.6
prevented from voting, 8.16
ties, 8.19
trade goods, 8.13
voting for elections, 8.9–8.11
voting for outcomes, 8.7, 8.8
W
“Warfare” strategy card, 88.0
command tokens, 88.1
primary ability, 88.1
resolving, 88.1, 88.2
redistributing tokens, 88.2
secondary ability, 88.3
resolving, 88.3
“when” effects, 1.13, 1.14
white arrows, 86.3
winning the game, 87.7, 87.8
cannot reveal objective, 52.15
wormholes, 89.0
deep space cannon, 89.2
Ghosts of Creuss
delta wormhole, 89.4
neighbors, 51.3
neighbors, 51.2
types, 89.1

32
CREDITS
FOURTH EDITION DEVELOPMENT: Dane Beltrami with Corey Konieczka
ORIGINAL GAME DESIGN: Christian T. Petersen
TECHNICAL WRITING: Adam Baker
PRODUCER: Jason Walden
EDITING AND PROOFREADING: Mark Pollard
BOARD GAME MANAGER: James Kniffen
TWILIGHT IMPERIUM STORY TEAM: Matt Newman, Katrina Ostrander, 
and Sam Stewart
GRAPHIC DESIGN: Christopher Hosch with WiL Springer
GRAPHIC DESIGN MANAGER: Brian Schomburg
COVER ART: Scott Schomburg 
MAP TILE ART: Stephen Somers
INTERIOR ART: Cristi Balanescu, Anders Finér, Tomasz Jedruszek, Alex Kim, 
and David Auden Nash
ART DIRECTION: Andy Christensen
SCULPTING: Neil Hagre, with Bexley Andrajack and Akshay Pathak
SCULPTING COORDINATOR: Niklas Norman
MANAGING ART DIRECTOR: Melissa Shetler
QUALITY ASSURANCE COORDINATOR: Zach Tewalthomas
SENIOR PROJECT MANAGER: John Franz-Wichlacz
SENIOR MANAGER OF PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT: Chris Gerber
CREATIVE DIRECTOR: Andrew Navaro
PRODUCTION COORDINATION: Marcia Colby, Jason Glawe,  
Liza Lundgren, and Johanna Whiting
PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT: Megan Duehn and Jason Beaudoin
PLAYTESTERS: Jason Aiken, Maxwell Andersen, Victor Andrade, Michael Beck, Tyler 
Beckett, Thomas Black, Zach Blomme, Brandon Bockhold, Michael Bomholt, JS Bragg, 
Ben Burch, Jonathan Bush, Stefano Carlino, Andrew Carr, Matt Carter, Federico Castelo, 
Kara Centell-Dunk, Roy Chartier, Daniel Lovat Clark, John Clarke, Kevin Collins, Rebecca 
Corner, Glenn Cullen, Hayden Cunmingham, Caterina D’Agostini, Stuart Day, Chris J 
Davis, Andrea Dell’Agnese & Julia Faeta, Pablo Densen, Ariel Dominelli, Tony Fanchi, 
Andrew Fischer, Simon Forsbrook, Alix Talbot Gagner, David Gagner, Ian Gillings, Molly 
Glover, Tino Gouvras, Chris Hardin, Alex Hartman, Ben Hodgson, Grace Holdinghaus, 
Chris Huter, Nate Kaplan, Daniel Keith, Erik Kemnitz, Jason Kerr, Jewel Kerr, Kees-jan 
Kleef, Lawrence Keohane, Ben Kline, Oli Lan, Jamie Lewis, Josh Lewis, Scott Lewis, Mark 
Larson, Ty Lunch, Kenneth Mackinnon, Greg Mahlum, Federico Martínez, Pim Mauve, 
Chris	Mayfield,	Michael	McFadgen,	Sam	McGrath,	Max	McLaughlin-Callan,	Sawyer	
Meegan, Mihai Georgescu, Troy Miller, Peter Leo Minor, Glenn Mondro, Riley Mullins, 
Will Mundy, Nathan Neeson, Ken Nelson, Eli Ninnemann, Ciaran O’Sullivan, Spencer 
Palmer, Robert Parkinson, Ryan Peck, Brandon Perdue, Ben Pletcher, Alex Porter, Jeremy 
Rainbow, Kendra Rainbow, Scott Randolph, Mike Reynolds, Daniel Smith, Joshua Stocks, 
Kramer Straube, Taylor Swain, AJ Swanson, Zach Tedford, Zeb Tedford, James Thorne, Jake 
Tighe, Regine Mualla Tighe, Aaron Uchytil, Jan-cees V oogd, Joris V oogd, Mark Wilkie, and 
Brandon Williams
Special thanks to all of our beta testers.
© 2017 Fantasy Flight Games. Fantasy Flight Supply is TM of Fantasy Flight Games, Inc. 
Fantasy Flight Games, Twilight Imperium, and the FFG logo are ® of Fantasy Flight Games. 
Fantasy Flight Games is located at 1995 West County Road B2, Roseville, Minnesota, 
55113, USA, 651-639-1905. Actual components may vary from those shown. Made in 
China. THIS PRODUCT IS NOT A TOY . NOT INTENDED FOR USE BY PERSONS 13 
YEARS OF AGE OR YOUNGER.


