Needed to Play:
The 24 cards (4 Sector Map Cards, 8 Civilization Cards, 4 Ship and 4 Tech Tree Cards and 4 Encounter Cards), 15 eurocubes in each of 
4 player colors (red, yellow, green and blue), 3 Civilization Markers per player in matching player colors,  8 black and 8 white eurocubes for 
planetary moons, and 10 six-sided dice. 
Game Setup:
Each player receives one double sided Ship Card and Tech Tree Card. Players may choose which ship type they will use in the game. 
The Wanderer  is easier to upgrade but weaker in terms of   The Raider  is more expensive to upgrade but is a stronger
defense and attack. The ship also gives you more Influence  defense and attack ship in combat.
Resource capacity.    
Each card displays a series of horizontal tracks for your resources ( Credits , Influence , Energy  and Ore ). 
The Ship Card shows the cost to build additional ships in the upper left and is divided into 
four sections which correspond on the Tech Tree Card to: Engines (ENG) [movement], 
Command (COM)  [ability to affect die rolls during the game], Shields (DEF) and Weapons (ATT) 
[used in combat].
The Tech Tree Card shows your tech achievements and a cost in Resources to gain new upgrades. 
Each player receives 15 wooden cubes in their player color  (eleven of these are used on 
the resource tracks and for tech upgrades, the other four are used as a player’s ships in the game) 
and three colored Civilization markers to show which planets are under that player’s control .
PARSEC X
A MICRO 4X SPACE EMPIRE GAME
BY TODD SANDERS
Ship CardTech Tree Card
This game, for 2 to 4 players, is a micro-simulation Space Empire game. The 
winning player is the one who is able to conquer, ally with, and maintain 
control of 4 different planets within the parsec boundaries of System X.
Ships
Resource Tracking 
Markers
Civilization 
Markers


Ship Cards and Tech Tree Cards
The cost in resources 
to build additional ships
Starting resources icon
A Ship Card is divided into 
four sections which correspond on 
the Tech Tree Card to: 
Engines (ENG) [movement] 
Command (COM)  
[ability to affect die rolls during 
the game]
Shields (DEF) and Weapons (ATT) 
[used in combat]
Number to add to a combat attack 
roll
Number to add to a combat 
defense roll
Place a wooden cube on each of 
these initial tech achievements
During the Upgrade  Phase of 
each round a player may gain 
new technical achievements by 
spending the indicated cost in 
resources
The icons to the left of the resource 
costs show either the cost to use 
that particular achievement and/or 
modify a die roll during the game. 
All  player’s ships will share
 these achievements.
To move one ship up to 
3 orthogonal sectors during the 
Movement  Phase a player must 
spend 2 Energy Resources
Later achievements will allow 
a player to spend fewer 
Energy Resources to 
travel across more sectors 
The VETERAN CAPTAIN  lets a player spend 1 
Influence Resource to add +1 to a die roll during the 
Encounter  Phase
The DRONE-AI  lets a player spend 1 Influence 
Resource to reroll a die of theirs during the 
Encounter  Phase. The player must accept the 2nd 
value rolled
The SHIPMIND  lets a player spend 1 Influence 
Resource to reroll a die of theirs twice during the 
Encounter  Phase. The player may accept any value 
rolled
Place a wooden cube next to each of the indicated starting resources icons ( •)  
Track gained and lost resources with these cubes as the game progresses
SHIP CARD
TECH TREE CARD

Sector Map Cards
Sector Map Card placement 
for a 3 or 4 player game
Sector Map Card placement 
for a 2 player game
A Sector Map Card is given to each 
player  and they should be oriented 
depending on the number of players as 
shown in the diagrams below.
The cards are double sided and it is 
suggested that players choose side A 
when first playing the game. 
Each player then places 2 wooden cubes 
on their Homeworld as their starting 
fleet of ships and keeps two more cubes 
in reserve.
During the Upkeep  Phase players may 
gain 2 of the 4 listed resources (they 
choose which) from their Homeworld. 
As planets are explored and controlled 
by players they will gain additional 
resources.
Players move their ships during the 
Movement  Phase. They may only move 
a ship orthogonally, never diagonally, 
across the sector spaces on the map. 
Moving ships costs Energy Resources as 
indicated on a player’s Tech Tree Card.
During the Movement  Phase a player 
may move one or more ships through the 
Spacewarp: one Sector card clockwise or 
counterclockwise.
A Player’s Homeworld: 
Resources able to be 
chosen during the 
Upkeep Phase are 
indicated in the corners 
of this sector
Spacewarp Icon: allows a 
player to send ships to other 
Sector Map Cards
Unknown Planet Icon:
Unknown planets waiting 
to be explored during the 
Encounter  Phase
sector space
Sector Map Card - Side A Sector Map Card - Side B
During the Movement  
Phase a player may move 
one or more ships through 
the Spacewarp: one Sector 
card clockwise or counter 
clockwise.

Civilization Cards
There are 8 Civilization Cards. Each shows one of the 8 civilizations that make up the Galactic Council. Each player receives two of these cards 
randomly and may choose one of the Civilizations, discarding the other . A Civilization gives a player certain bonuses in the game.
Each Civilization allows the player to convert one 
type of resource into another [ example: Credits 
into Energy ]. This is a one way conversion
The Civilization’s name and an image of their 
Homeworld
If this Civilization 
gains Ore during 
an Upkeep  Phase, 
the player may gain 
one additional Ore 
Resource
During the 
Upgrade  Phase, 
Shields cost 
one less Energy 
Resource for the 
player
During the 
Encounter  Phase, 
the player may 
reroll their die if 
they are defending 
in combat
During the 
Upgrade  Phase, 
Engines cost one 
less Ore Resource 
for the player
During the 
Encounter  Phase, 
the player may 
reroll one die if 
they are attacking 
in combat

Sample Game Start
This is an example game diagram for the start of a 4 player game. Place the 10 dice, and 8 white and black cubes, within reach of all players.
cX
cX
cX
1234
1234
12
Eight of these dice will be used 
to represent explored planets 
in the game. The other two 
dice will be used during the 
Encounter  Phase
Black and white cubes 
represent moons orbiting 
encountered planets and will 
be randomly drawn during the 
Encounter  Phase
Players choose a Start Player however they wish and begin the game...

the four phases
upkeep
renew your resources
upgrade
spawn new ships
gain new tech
movement 
displace your forces
encounter
explore planets
combat other civilizations
Rounds and Phases of the Game
There are four phases in each round of the game. Players execute Phases 1 and 2 simultaneously and 3 and 
4 in clockwise order beginning with the Start Player (The Start Player will call out each of the Phases in turn 
and make sure all players have completed each Phase). The first player to control four Planets at the end of 
a round’s Phase 4 is the winner.
At the end of each round, the next player clockwise becomes the new Start Player and will call out the 
Phases.
the four phases
upkeep
renew your resources
upgrade
spawn new ships
gain new tech
movement 
displace your forces
encounter
explore planets
combat other civilizations
Phase 1: UPKEEP - Players execute this Phase simultaneously.
During this Phase players gain resources from their Homeworld and any Planets and Colony moons they 
control. They track these accordingly on their Ship and Tech Tree Cards. For their Homeworld, a player 
may choose any 2 types of the 4 listed resources (2 Credits , 1 Influence , 3 Energy  and 2 Ore ) [ examples: a 
player may choose 2 Ore and 2 Credit Resources, 1 Influence and 2 Credit Resources, or 3 Energy and 2 Ore 
Resources ]
For any planets a player has encountered, and now controls, they may gain two of the specific resource 
of that planet [ example a Farm World produces 2 Credit Resources ] or 1 Influence Resource. They may 
not gain both.
For any planets that have a Colony Moon, the player may gain 1 additional Influence Resource.
the four phases
upkeep
renew your resources
upgrade
spawn new ships
gain new tech
movement 
displace your forces
encounter
explore planets
combat other civilizations
Phase 2: UPGRADE - Players execute this Phase simultaneously.
During this Phase players may gain new technical achievements by 
spending the indicated cost in resources shown to the right of the 
tech achievement. Move the wooden marker to the newly purchased 
achievement. A player may buy more than one achievement during 
this Phase. If buying multiple achievements in the same column 
[ example: upgrading from the Engines: Fusion Drive to Tachyon 
Drive to Ehrenhaft Drive ] at the same time, the cost for each 
upgrade must be paid in resources. A player may never skip over an 
achievement in any Tech Tree column without paying for it. 
Each Civilization allows the player to convert one type of resource 
into another [ example: Credits into Energy ] to pay for these Upgrade 
costs as needed.
Players may also buy additional ships in this Phase. The cost of 
a new ship is shown in the upper left of the Ship Card. Pay the 
indicated resources and place the new ship either on the player’s 
Homeworld or on a Shipyard Moon, if the player controls one. 
A player may never have more than four ships at any time.


The red player has placed one 
of his ships on an Unknown Planet. 
He rolls one die and determines it 
is a  3 Jovian World. 
He pays 3 Ore Resources to settle 
the world and places one of his 
Civilization Markers under the die 
to claim control.
the four phases
upkeep
renew your resources
upgrade
spawn new ships
gain new tech
movement 
displace your forces
encounter
explore planets
combat other civilizations
Phase 3: MOVEMENT - Players execute this phase in clockwise order 
beginning with the current Start Player.
Players may now move their ships based on their current level of 
Engine technology. In the example image, the player has a Tachyon 
Drive . This allows them to move one ship up to 3 orthogonal sectors 
by paying one Energy Resource . Players may move as many ships as 
far as they like as long as they can pay with the Energy Resources. 
A player may move fewer than the full number of sectors if they 
choose. Players may only move orthogonally, never diagonally . If a 
player places a ship on a Spacewarp icon they may place that ship 
on another Spacewarp icon of their choice one sector clockwise or 
counterclockwise without spending any extra Energy Resources.
To move to another Spacewarp, the player must wait until the next 
Movement  Phase.
For the purposes of Phase 4, if a player’s ship moves onto a space 
occupied by another player’s ships or controlled planet, the moving 
player will be the Attacker  during Phase 4 - Encounter: Combat.
the four phases
upkeep
renew your resources
upgrade
spawn new ships
gain new tech
movement 
displace your forces
encounter
explore planets
combat other civilizations
Phase 4: ENCOUNTER - Players execute this phase in clockwise 
order beginning with the current Start Player.
A. Encountering an Unknown Planet
Note: Refer to the Encounter Cards explanation on the next page for 
further explanations of each Encounter type. 
If a player has placed a ship on a sector with an Unknown Planet 
Icon, they may roll one die to determine the planetary type. The die 
is then placed with the number rolled face up on top of the Unknown 
Planet icon. If the number rolled is a 1, 2 or 3, the player may pay 
the settlement cost in resources and place one of their Civilization 
Markers under the die to show they control the planet. Once 
claimed, the player receives the resources of that planet during the 
Upkeep  Phase.
If a 4 is rolled, the player has encountered a Xenophobic Empire 
and must attack the planet in Combat. If successful, the player may 
roll one die for the planetary type and place a Civilization Marker 
under the die (rotated to the correct planetary type) to show they 
control the planet. A random cube is drawn (white or black) and 
placed next to the planetary die as a moon. A white cube is a Colony 
and gives the player one Influence Resource during the Upkeep  
Phase. A black cube is a Shipyard and will allow the player to build 
ships here, in addition to their Homeworld during the
 Upgrade  Phase. 
If the player is unsuccessful in their attack, or there is a tie in the 
roll, the player’s ship is lost and the die is placed on the sector with 
a 4 side facing up. Any player may encounter the Xenophobic 
Empire in a later round and attempt to control it in Combat.
If a 5 is rolled, the player has encountered an Elder Civilization. 
They may attempt to use Influence to forge a Diplomatic Alliance 
with this Civilization. If successful, the player may roll one die for the 
planetary type and place a Civilization Marker under the die (rotated 
to the correct planetary type) to show they control the planet. No 
moons will be placed with this Encounter type.
If a player is unsuccessful or there is a tie in the roll while forging 
a Diplomatic Alliance, the planet die is placed with the 5 side of 
the die facing up and the player loses 1 Influence Resource if they 
have any. The player’s ship remains on the sector. Any player may 
encounter the Elder Civilization in a later round and attempt to 
control it through Diplomatic Alliance.
3

Encounter Cards
The four Encounter cards are used during the Encounter Phase to determine what type of planet is encountered.
When an unknown planet is encountered the player rolls one die and consults the Planetary Atlas to determine the Planetary Type. A roll of a 
1 determines the planet is a Mining World, 2 - a Farming World, 3 - a Jovian World. if a 4, 5 or 6 is rolled, the player consults one of the 
other Encounter Cards to determine what to do.
The cost to settle 
the planet rolled 
with the die and 
the resources 
gained during 
Upkeep . 
Note: a player may 
gain Ore, Credit or 
Energy Resources, 
OR  Influence, never 
both.
If a 4 is rolled, the 
player encounters a 
Xenophobic Empire 
and must attack the 
planet in Combat. 
The planet adds a +5 
to its die roll for its 
Defense Strength.
If the player is 
successful they 
may roll one die to 
determine the type 
of planet they now 
control (placing a 
Civilization Marker 
under the die) and 
randomly draw a 
moon. They do not 
have to pay any 
resources to settle 
this planet. They 
will gain resources 
during Upkeep .
If the player is 
unsuccessful in their 
attack, or there is 
a tie in the roll, the 
player’s ship is lost 
and the die is placed 
on the sector with a 
4 side facing up. In 
later rounds, players 
may attempt to 
Combat again.
If a 5 is rolled, the 
player encounters 
an Elder Civilization 
and may attempt to 
forge a Diplomatic 
Alliance by 
paying Influence 
Resources equal 
to 1D3 + 2.
If the player is 
successful they 
may roll one die to 
determine the type 
of planet they now 
control (placing 
a Civilization 
Marker under the 
die). They do not 
have to pay any 
resources to settle 
this planet. They 
will gain resources 
during Upkeep .
If a player is 
unsuccessful or 
there is a tie in the 
roll while forging 
a Diplomatic 
Alliance, the planet 
die is placed with 
the 5 side of the 
die facing up and 
the player loses 1 
Influence Resource, 
if they have any. 
The player’s ship 
remains on the 
sector. Any player 
may encounter the 
Elder Civilization in 
a later round.
If a 6 is rolled, the player encounters a planet they may Terraform. 
The player may spend resources as listed and choose the planetary 
type they wish to control, placing a Civilization Marker under the 
die, rotating it to the representative number for that planetary type. 
The player then randomly draws and places a moon. They will gain 
resources during Upkeep  for this planet. If the player does not choose 
to Terraform, the planet remains uncontrolled and the die is placed on 
the Sector with the 6 side facing up. The player’s ship remains on the 
sector. Any player may Terraform this planet in a later round.

the four phases
upkeep
renew your resources
upgrade
spawn new ships
gain new tech
movement 
displace your forces
encounter
explore planets
combat other civilizations
Phase 4: ENCOUNTER - continued 
If a 6 is rolled the player encounters a planet they may Terraform. The player may spend resources as listed 
and choose the planetary type they wish to control, placing a Civilization Marker under the die, rotating it to 
the representative number for that planetary type. 
The player will gain resources during Upkeep  for this planet. 
A random cube is drawn (white or black) and placed next to the planet die as a moon. A white cube is a 
Colony and gives the player one Influence Resource during the Upkeep  Phase. A black cube is a Shipyard and 
will allow the player to build ships here, in addition to their Homeworld during the Upgrade  Phase. 
If the player does not choose to Terraform, the planet remains uncontrolled and the die is placed on the 
Sector with the 6 side facing up. The player’s ship remains on the sector. Any player may attempt to 
Terraform this planet in a later round.
Unclaimed Homeworlds in the 2 and 3 player game version may not  be encountered.
B. Combat
1. Combat With Other Players’ Ships
If a player, during the Movement  Phase, has placed a ship or ships in a sector already occupied by another 
player they will be the Attacker and the resident player the Defender. Each player rolls one die as their Attack 
or Defense Strength and adds their respective Weapon (Attack) or Shield (Defense) number to that, as well as 
any other bonuses the Civilizations may have. 
Further, any additional ship of a player, which is also on the same sector, adds a +1 to the total Attack or 
Defense Strength of that player. The highest number wins and the player who has lost must remove one of 
their ships.
When attacking or defending, Combat for each ship is one on one. 
[example: Red is the Attacker and has 1 ship, Blue is the Defender and has 2 Ships. If Red wins the first 
combat then Blue removes one ship and Red will then attack the second Blue Ship].
In the case of a tie, both the Attacker and Defender’s ships are removed. 
2. Combat With Other Players’ Controlled Planets
A player may attack a planet controlled by another player. In this case the controlled planet has a +4 to its die 
roll for its Defense Strength. Players may place ships on the same sector as a planet they control, conferring 
an additional +1 to the planet’s Defense Strength for each ship there. As with 1. Combat with other player’s 
ships : the player who has lost must remove one of their ships.
A player may never attack another player’s Homeworld.
If the attacking player is successful, they replace the previous Civilization marker with one of their own and 
they now control the planet.
3. Combat with the Xenophobic Empire
If a 4 is rolled, the player encounters a Xenophobic Empire and must attack the planet in Combat. The planet 
adds a +5 to its die roll for its Defense Strength.
If the player is successful they may roll one die to determine the type of planet they now control (placing 
a Civilization Marker under the die) and randomly draw a moon. They do not have to pay any resources to 
settle this planet. They will gain resources during Upkeep .
If the player is unsuccessful in their attack, or there is a tie in the roll, the player’s ship is lost and the die is 
placed on the sector with a 4 side facing up. In later rounds, players may attempt to Combat again.
Winning the Game
The first player to control four Planets at the end of a round’s Phase 4 is the winner.
Artwork and rules for Parsec X are copyright ©2013 - Todd Sanders/Air and Nothingness Press. You may print and play this game for free, but 
not re-distribute it in any form without consent.

The first player to control four Planets at the end of a round’s Phase 4 is the winner.
Game Setup
 •  Each player receives one double-sided Ship Card and Tech Tree Card. Players may choose which ship 
  type they will use in the game. 
 •  Each player receives 15 wooden cubes in their player color and three colored Civilization markers to 
  show which planets are under that player’s control.
 • Place a wooden cube next to each of the indicated starting resources icons ( •).
 • Place a wooden cube on each of the initial tech achievements at the top of each Tech Tree column.
 • Give a Sector Map Card to each player. They should be oriented depending on the number of players. 
 • Each player places 2 wooden cubes on their Homeworld as their starting fleet of ships and keeps two more cubes in reserve.
 • Each player receives 2 Civilization Cards and may choose one of the Civilizations, discarding the other.
 • Place the 10 dice, and 8 white and black cubes within reach of all players.
Rounds and Phases
Phase 1: UPKEEP - Players execute this Phase simultaneously
 During this Phase players gain resources from their Homeworld and any Planets and Colony moons they control. They track these accordingly   
 on their Ship and Tech Tree Cards. 
Phase 2: UPGRADE - Players execute this Phase simultaneously
 During this Phase players may gain new technical achievements by spending the indicated cost in resources shown to the right of the tech   
 achievement. Move the wooden marker on to the newly purchased achievement. 
 Players may also buy additional ships in this Phase. The cost of a new ship is shown in the upper left of the Ship Card. 
Phase 3: MOVEMENT - Players execute this phase in clockwise order beginning with the current Start Player.
 Players may now move their ships based on their current level of Engine technology. Players may move as many ships as far as they like as  
 long as they can pay with the Energy Resources. A player may move fewer than the full number of sectors if they choose. Players may only  
 move orthogonally, never diagonally. If a player places a ship on a Spacewarp icon they may place that ship on another Spacewarp icon of  
 their choice one sector clockwise or counterclockwise without spending any extra Energy Resources. To move to another Spacewarp, the   
 player must wait until the next Movement  Phase.
Phase 4: ENCOUNTER - Players execute this phase in clockwise order beginning with the current Start Player.
 A. Encountering an Unknown Planet
  Refer to the Encounter Cards for each of the Encounter types. Unclaimed Homeworlds in the 2 and 3 player game version 
  may not  be encountered.
 B. Combat
  1.  Combat With Other Players’ Ships
   If a player, during the Movement Phase, has placed a ship or ships in a sector already occupied by another player they will be the   
   Attacker and the resident player the Defender. Each player rolls one die as their Attack or Defense Strength and adds their respective   
   Weapon (Attack) or Shield (Defense) number to that, as well as any other bonuses the players’ Civilizations may have. 
   Further, any additional ship of a player which is also on the same sector adds a +1 to the total Attack or Defense Strength of that player.   
   The highest number wins and the player who has lost must remove one of their ships. When attacking or defending, Combat for each   
   ship is one on one. In the case of a tie, both the Attacker and Defender’s ships are removed. 
  2.  Combat With Other Players’ Controlled Planets
   A player may attack a planet controlled by another player. In this case the controlled planet has a +4 to its die roll for its Defense  
   Strength. Players may place ships on the same sector as a planet they control, conferring an additional +1 to their Defense Strength for   
   each ship there. A player may never attack another player’s Homeworld.
  3. Combat with the Xenophobic Empire
   If a 4 is rolled, the player encounters a Xenophobic Empire and must attack the planet in Combat. The planet adds a +5 to its die roll for  
   its Defense Strength. If the player is successful they may roll one die to determine the type of planet they now control (placing a   
   Civilization Marker under the die) and randomly draw a moon. They do not have to pay any resources to settle this planet. They will gain   
   resources during Upkeep.
   If the player is unsuccessful in their attack, or there is a tie in the roll, the player’s ship is lost and the die is placed on the sector with 
   a 4 side facing up. In later rounds, players may attempt to Combat again.
the four phases
upkeep
renew your resources
upgrade
spawn new ships
gain new tech
movement 
displace your forces
encounter
explore planets
combat other civilizations
QUIKGUIDE

